Firfe is the traditional [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiwan]] artform of painting using a single brush and, usually, a single colour of ink on parchment made usually from their domesticated flock of sheep, but sometimes from rarer hunted quarries. There are two main types of firfe, "Land" firfe and "Religious" or "Story" firfe.
# Land Firfe
There are two types of Land Firfe, each with differing philosophies behind them, "Empty Land" Firfe and "Lively Land" Firfe. "Empty Land" Firfe focuses on static elements of landscapes and artists employing this style of Firfe will usually omit any living creatures present in the area they are drawing from their artwork unless they are really far away or in the sky, such as a flock of birds. Common pieces of "Empty Land" Firfe focus on lake shores, areas of [[Haankay Steppe|the steppe]] you can see the mountains in, or sites of much cultural-religious significance to the Haankaysiw.

On the other hand, "Lively land" Firfe involves capturing as much of life as possible, usually with the aim of having as much dynamic movement as possible in the piece. Common pieces of "Lively Land" Firfe focus on individual Haankaysiw communities, herds of animals, Haankaysiw groups on the move, or Haankaysiw raiding parties.
## Empty Land Firfe
The philosophy behind Empty Land Firfe is the beauty of the natural world. The Haankaysiw believe that the natural world is inherently beautiful, and must be respected. Their large flocks of pastoral animals can lead to an area becoming overgrazed and damaged, amongst other things such as unchecked fires or overgathering. Thus, they paint gorgeous landscapes to remind themselves of nature’s beauty and to be cautious and respectful towards it.

Empty Land Firfe is also used to venerate spirits, such as those believed to inhabit or be trees, rocks, rivers, and the like. By painting them, the Haankaysiw believe they are honouring the spirit, and that they can pay respects at a distance through the imagery in the painting. However, one can not give offerings to a piece of Firfe, and must undergo a journey to the physical location to do so.
## Lively Land Firfe

On the other hand, Lively Land Firfe is built on the philosophy that life has intrinsic value, and that every moment is a moment of worth. It aims to take a snapshot of the very dynamic and constantly moving thing that is living. Lively Land Firfe is not exclusively drawn of people, the Haankaysiw do not believe people to be inherently better than animals. As such, pieces of Lively Land Firfe can include the galloping of herds of horses, or a startled [[Uunko]] taking off.

Lively Land Firfe often exaggerates how dynamic the movements were. A group of children walking may become a group of children running and playing, a closed door may become someone coming out of a doorway, a still tree might become one being blown by the wind. As it is an artform that attempts to capture a single, dynamic moment, artists that create Lively Land Firfe will often have to draw from a mix of memory or imagination of what actions were actually being performed, as the camera has not yet been invented on Winter and moments pass by quickly.
# Story Firfe
Story Firfe depicts myths, folklores, and tales. Unlike Land Firfe, Story Firfe does not involve drawing what one sees, but what one imagines. The Haankaysiw don’t make any distinction between their myth and folklore, and tales they tell about their ancestors, seeing them both as true events or based on true events that have happened to the Haankaysiw.

The philosophy behind Story Firfe is that of honouring and venerating Haankaysiw ancestors, telling the stories of the myths of the Haankaysiw, and simply depicting important events in their past with beauty and a brush.