Gender in [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw]] culture is vastly different to the strict binary system that has been present in our Western World in recent centuries. The Haankaysiw do not believe in a two gender system, nor a three gender or even five gender system - they understand gender as a diverse spectrum with infinite points and infinite expressions that is divorced from biological traits. While there are some genders within this understanding that can be described as analogous to genders we may recognize, they are likely not going to be 1:1 representations. At one point in the existence of the Haankaysiw culture, the understanding of gender was more narrow, tied to biological, and with somewhat stricter gender roles, however this was during the period of history that has long become mythology by the time AGS starts and as such has left little to no trace in current Haankaysiw cultural beliefs nor in H端m Kiinfe.

Gender roles in Haankaysiw culture are almost non-existent, having little to no bearing on the lives of the average Haankaysiw, often only influencing fashion and aesthetics with some exceptions. In Haankaysiw culture, gender has no bearing on martial prowess, inheritance and lineage, hobbies or lifetime pursuits, and the like. However, some genders may be more inclined to be pushed into roles of spiritual significance, and these exceptions will be discussed later.

Linguistically, gender influences very little. H端m Kiinfe does not feature a noun class system, and most terms that divided by gender in English are instead divided by age in H端m Kiinfe, reflecting how Haankaysiw culture places more emphasis on someone's age than their gender. For clarification or individual presence, some usually ungendered words can be compounded with an individuals term for their gender identity. Gender identity terms exist in two ways in H端m Kiinfe, gender identity terms coined a long time ago, and gender identity terms coined more recently. Older terms tend not to have a clear etymological pathway, or are very eroded words from before the current Haankaysiw understanding of gender, and newer terms are a noun compounded with the Haankaysiw word for gender. Newer terms are frequently coined or recoined, as they rarely get reused by other individuals in a single community. There are newer coined terms that are known across Haankaysiw communities, however.