During a [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw]] raid, it is a very common sight for the raiders to be wearing masked modelled after spirits, usually ones whose appearances we would consider to be demonic or monstrous in nature, though bestial style masks or masks designed to represent major figures in Haankaysiw tales also appear with frequency. The reason each raiding party wears a mask isn't always the same, and it varies from party to party, tribe to tribe, or region to region. The masks are made out of wood, metal, leather or cloth, and are often painted. They are also always attached or secured to a helmet.

One of the reasons a Haankaysiw raiding party may wear a mask is to confuse, ward against, and waylay malevolent or vengeful spirits that may otherwise target, chase, or torment a raider, especially if that raider had to take a life during the raid. Thus, the spirits chosen to model the masks after serve different strategies towards these goals. A design may be chosen to intimidate or directly ward against a spirit's attacks or targeting, in which case powerful spirits or guardian spirits may be chosen for the design of the mask. Otherwise, a design may be chosen to confuse a spirit by making them believe you are someone else, so when you return to camp and take the mask off the spirit loses your track and leaves - This method doesn't have any strong favourings, as in theory any disguise will do, however some Haankaysiw believe donning the visage of a Haankaysiw hero will confuse the spirit outright due to that individual being supposed to be dead.

Another reason a Haankaysiw raiding party may wear a mask is because they believe by doing so the spirit that visage belongs to will imbue with some of their power and skill. This reason tends to favour spirits or figures in Haankaysiw with great strength and/or skill but also favours spirits with great reputation, as the Haanakaysiw also believe that some of the fear the folks they will be fighting would have had by fighting the spirit behind the visage is also imparted on the raider wearing the mask, thus acting as supernatural intimidation.

Finally, Haankaysiw groups that do not believe in the supernatural reasons behind wearing one of these masks may still choose to wear them for a handful of reasons. They may choose to wear them to tap into the intimidating reputation behind them, either when raiding non-Haankaysiw who may fear the masks from other Haankaysiw raiders, or when raiding fellow Haankaysiw who do have supernatural beliefs about them. Another reason they may wear them is simply for the intimidation factor of some of the horrifying or grotesque visages depicted in the masks, or for the anonymity granted by them to reduce the chance of being sought against for revenge. Finally, a Haankaysiw raiding party may choose to wear one for the practical benefit of having your face covered by metal or wood or leather when facing archers.

Haankaysiw that hold spiritual/supernatural beliefs about the masks may also use them for certain rituals and ritual hunts or when hunting major quarry or quarry that are threats.