Parents name their children specific child names. These child names invoke an aspiration the parents have for their child, such as "Caring", "Fast", "Intelligent", etc., however these names are always conjugated in the plural and always come from nouns that can be used as adjectives. Putting the names into the plural is done to ward away spirit trickery, as the [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw]] believe that this will make the malevolent spirits believe there is a pair of children named as such and spirits want to collect a pair, and so the spirit will get confused and frustrated finding the other half of the pair and move on in search of an easier target.

When a child enters adulthood, they get to choose their own name which replaces these child names. The threshold for entering adulthood varies from region to region, and sometimes even from tribe to tribe, though it usually sits in the 16-21 age range. For tribes who have it on the younger end, it is less about adulthood and more about independence.

Although native Haankaysiw names have no inherent gender, loaned names may still have an inherent gender. Haankaysiw also tend to loan names from their neighbours, either by naming themselves after legendary figures their friends tell them about, or after a family friend, or even an ancestor from a different culture. Adult names can be nouns such as plants, animals that aren't herded, nouns derived from verbs with -ke, and similar such nouns. Adult names can also be compounds, such as "Stone deer", "Eternal Melody", or "Bronze Hero".

Haankaysiw people have two "surnames", a Patronymic-type name based on the chosen name of the eldest parent, and a clan or family name which is sometimes compounded with the individuals profession or main talents.

For example, if Ruruʻon is older than their partner and they have a child they call Miiʻiʻ and belong to the Reenvepfaanru tribe, Miiʻiʻ's full name would be "Reenvepfaanrusow Seʻiruroʻon Miiʻiʻ" or 'Miiʻiʻ, child of Ruroʻon, (who comes) from Reenvepfaanru', while if Hekan is also a child of Ruruʻon and is known for their art, they may be called "Firkereenvepfaanru Seʻiruroʻon Hekan" or 'Hekan, child of Ruroʻon, Reenvepfaanru-artist'