**Roʻayfeyohna ʻon ʻi niʻ sektii**, or "Stone offering statue of the foxes" is the name or title for a type of worship, ritual, and/or ceremony statue or shrine-like object the [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw]] place on the edge of the [[Rime]] forest, or in clearings not far inwards. The statues are roughly the size of an average adult Haankaysiw, featuring a fox modelled after the [[Lkoa]] (known to the Haankaysiw as _Sektii Lekowa_, or Lekowa(n) Foxes), with no standard pose, on a plinth with an offering space in front of them and are often decorated with symbolic coloured fabrics or written slips attached to ropes or cords.
The statues are made of stones found on [[K'tlagn]], however large enough stones are usually not found near the lakes that the Haankaysiw that live closest to the Lkoa inhabit. Thus, workable stones are sourced either from the Cradles or from other farther away Haankaysiw lands, or statues are built by Haankaysiw who can afford it and transported to the forest on a Pilgrimage like journey.

The statues are used to offer food items to the Lkoa, who the Haankaysiw see as spirits, and are also believed to be a spot where Lkoa can recharge their believed spiritual powers. The Haankaysiw believe the Lkoa to be or to contain messenger spirits, and associate the fox spirits with earth-working and house-building. A Haankaysiw may visit these statues to ask the believed spirits for blessings on their houses, protection against the elements for their houses, or longevity and heirloom quality for a newly built house. A Haankaysiw may also visit these statues for blessings or protection for a new quarry, or a Teyokkay or other influential individual may come for blessings or protections for major earthworking projects.