A [[Dictionary of Hüm Kiinfe Haankaysiw#teyokkay|Teyokkay]] is a ruler and leader of a [[Mefmoʻï]], which can both be loosely translated as Chieftan and Clan/Chiefdom respectively. A Teyokkay is the highest form of rulership in [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw]] culture, unless there is a Teyokkayʻoʻï. A Teyokkay can lead multiple Mefmoʻï, usually because of marriages or conquest, however each Mefmoʻï still has their own leader and the Teyokkay has greater duty towards their own Mefmoʻï.

As Teyokkay are wholly disparate in rulership and do not answer to a greater ruler, they often have to meet to discuss things such as agreements not to raid each other, discuss the trade of supplies, and other such events, and Teyokkay meet with each other directly to discuss these things. When Teyokkay meet, they must engage in a social ritual that measures the Ihös of the visiting Teyokkay. The two Teyokkay meet at opposite sides of the local Teyokkay's Tun with the visiting chief at the door and meet their Aariihös (a sacred blade wielded by Teyokkay) in the centre of the [[Tun]]. Then, the local Teyokkay issues a verbal challenge towards the visiting Teyokkay's Ihös, which initiates both Teyokkay to begin reciting the Chant of Ihös (Miküfekay Ihös) while rotating around the centre of the Tun navigating past the pillars. The Miküfekay Ihös is accompanied by a Haʻu, a Hüm Kiinfe word for any dance performed on specific significant occasions with choreography, such as before a battle or during a ritual, which is performed by both Teyokkay and any attendants. The Teyokkay maintain contact of their Ariihös, only breaking contact when they need to go past one of the poles, and thus most of the Haʻu is performed with their legs, offhands, and faces. The ritual ends when both Teyokkay return to their original positions and the local Teyokkay verbaly acknowledges that they recognize the Ihös of the visiting Teyokkay.

Usually, the whole ritual is still done even if the two Teyokkay have already met and performed it before. However, in situations of urgencey, the two Teyokkay meet their Aariihös in the center of the local Teyokkay's Tun as usual however instead of challenging the visiting Teyokkay's Ihös the local Teyokkay states that they recognize the visiting Teyokkay and recognizes their Ihös.

During the reign of [[Teyokkaykoʻwan Seʻisektiküt Towkatahey|Koʻwan Seʻisektiküt Towkatahey Teyokkayʻoʻï]], her Ihös was never challenged, however she still challenged the Ihös of the Teyokkay that reported to her, and said Teyokkay still challenged each others Ihös