The **[[Dictionary of Hüm Kiinfe Haankaysiw#tun|tun]]** (Original Steppe Haankaysiw `[ˈt͡sun]`) is the [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw]] name for a house, but more specifically refers to the traditional portable housing units used by the steppe nomads.

Tun's are made using multiple segments of wooden lattices, with the wood coming from either the sparsely wooded rivers that exist on the steppe or through trade, that are tied together to form a circular shape. Wooden poles connected to a central ring form the framework for the roof of the Tun, and 2, 3 or 4 wooden posts support the central ring. The wooden framework is wrapped in treated cloths, sewn together animal skins, and/or felts to insulate against the extreme yearly temperatures and non-zero amount of rain. The walls of a Tun are usually built short, both to preserve resources and to protect against the windiness of the steppe. Despite this, the Haankaysiw average on the taller side, and often have to duck or crouch to enter a Tun, yet the sloped roof design means there is enough headroom for even the tallest of the Haankaysiw. The door to a Tun is a flap made out a cloth or animal skin attached to a wooden frame that is tied to the lattice walls, there are usually grooves carved into the edge of the frame to allow the lattice work to fit more securely against the frame. In extremely rare cases, such as on the Tun of [[Teyokkaykoʻwan Seʻisektiküt Towkatahey|Hum Teyokkayʻoʻï]], a door may be made out of wood and placed on hinges.

Inside, the floor is covered in carpets, cloths, or animal skins, and a fireplace is made in the centre with a ring of stones. In Tuns with cheaper or thinner posts that hold up the central roof ring, they are often uncarved or undecorated beyond simple paints. Where the posts can afford to be made thinner, they are often carved or decorated with designs of animals, local spirits, household spirits, or major religious figures. Owls are very common due to the Haankaysiw belief that they are warding spirits, and thus their likeness provides protection from malicious spirits

The Tun is often furnished with sacks and clay pots for storage, wool blankets that mark sleeping spaces, and wooden or stone seating areas softened with felts, cloths, or animal skins. A Tun also contains multiple metal pots and pans and their lids, along with a three legged metal piece of furniture used to suspend them above the central fire. There is a designated metal pan for boiling water for the purpose of bathing that is separated from the ones used to cook or heat meals. Stone or wooden tables feature inside the dwelling too, sometimes with a cloth or animal skin sheet draped over them. Stone furniture is often fashioned from local stones and often is not taken during the frequent migrations. Horse-riding equipment is stored inside the Tun when not in use, alongside any instruments, weapons, or [[firfe]] tools.

For Haankaysiw communities with access to tea-equivalent plants, a ceramic kettle is suspended over the fire using a metal ring with spokes which is placed on the existing spokes that are too short for the kettle normally. The tea is poured into small ceramic cups that are often designed to stack into each other for storage and flare outward. Communities that don't drink tea often have drinks stored in waterskins or clay pots.

Haankaysiw communities with more access to wood may modify the furnishings in certain ways. A sleeping space may be bolstered with a lightweight portable frame on which the usual blankets go on top of. Some of the pots and sacks may instead be replaced with a small dresser for personal items or trinkets. They may also feature more small lightweight wooden furniture items, such as tables, collapsible wooden pillows, footrests, or altars.

The furnishings in a Tun are arranged based on the Haankaysiw constellations, the spirits they represent, and the reasons behind worshipping them. The doorway to a Tun always faces equatorward, as the Haankaysiw believe Ihös flows the strongest from the North, and as such they believe it promotes good health inside their houses. The sleeping areas are placed on the West side, as that is the direction the sun sets in, so the Haankaysiw go to sleep with the Sun. They hang up their horse riding gear and store their most personal belongings on the East side, as that is where the sun rises, and the Sun is an important figure in Haankaysiw beliefs and has strong ties to horses. A Tun is often built big enough to house a family, as their often isn't enough resources to build Tuns for each couple or individual in a community nor space to place them. Tun's are passed down from Eldest parent to Eldest child, and are only replaced if rendered unusable. Instead, Tun's are upgraded as they go down the generations, whether that be through replacing basic coverings for something more masterfully crafted when the old ones become damaged, or replacing thin damaged posts with thicker carved ones, or similar scenarios.

Outside of a Teyokkay's Tun, you can often find two ward posts, carved and decorated with warding and guardian spirits alongside spirits associated with great ihös, chiefdom, and prestige. These posts, which are never any more than waist high and are often shorter, are solidly driven into the ground outside the door of the Chief's Tun. The Chief's Tun is also usually the southernmost Tun, so that their door faces the Tun of their community.

The metals used to craft the furniture inside the Tuns is most commonly Bronze.