Esre Aster was member of the [[Aster Itif]] and the shortlived governor of the city of [[Asterin-Nem]]. 
Esre was born in the [[Uhustaw]] and was among the Ardanic people who considered themselves  native to this region, rather than just being a colonist coming over from the ancient homeland of [[Tyon-Arat]]. 

Esre was the successor of [[Ayuf Aster]], first student of [[Psirin Aster]], founder of the city itself and one of the most influential people in the Uhustaw. His own political legacy is fairly controversial. 

Esre was friends with several [[Nambāno]] [[Ōmōda]], learning the [[Nambāno]] language at an early age as well. As such Esre was fairly skilled at connecting the Ardanic communities with neighboring Nambāno communities. At the same time many Ardanians claimed that he grew too close to Nambāno customs, that he'd rather rule in the style of an Ōmōda. Another point of controversy was that he quite regularly invited foreign dignitaries into the [[Sula Arapa]], the "House of Guests" to celebrate lavish feasts and impress his friends and allies. 

When Ayuf grew old he placed Esre in several influential positions to make him his eventual successor. When Ayuf died, the controversies surrounding Esre did not die down. During a short conflict known as the [[Šrašipmi]], Esre was deposed and exiled to the Tyon-Arat, where he would spent the rest of his life in the city of [[Tyeleš]]. Some people asked him to restore his governorship of Asterin-Nem, but he never took up the offer, instead he was politically sidelined and lived in relative obscurity. 