the Aalnanzëthathke'apûgndox people live along the cliffs and slopes of the central Plateau in the [K'tlagn](https://winter.miraheze.org/wiki/K%27tlagn "K'tlagn") region in their cities of clay and mortar, between the low Mediterranean forests on its west, steppe grasslands to its south and east, and the sub arctic stretches of its Northern most edge, the top of this plateau has a lushness found nowhere else in the K'tlagn basin. The rugged terrain has provided for the people as they have lived here for untold generations and their position in this land has given them assesses to all of the riches of the continent. The plateau has one of the major silver and tin mines as well as several gold deposits which are used for decoration of their clothes and homes, as well as copper brought by traders of the fields bellow used in the making of new bronze tools and sculptures, instruments and records. The politics of this people are dominated by great cities which head coalitions of smaller cities around them, these great cities have populations of tens of thousands and the greatest of these is Chlm'atoi (lit. great head) the source of the great river which cutes through the earth and spills out into the steppe and desert and which according to myth was created when the first Aalnanzëthathke'apûgndox people struck down the ancient bird who carved this plateau out of the earth and its blood came down the mountain side. The Aalnanzëthathke'apûgndox tend to herds of grazing cattle on the roughs of hills and the deep valleys grow crops on the gentle slopes and on the tops of mountains carve our orchards and vineyards. On a deep level music and dance are part of the traditions of the Aalnanzëthathke'apûgndox with the amphitheatre considered as important to the well being of the cities as the communal kitchens shrines and aqueducts, and cities have no better way to show their prosperity then the creation of mass ensembles in every plaza and clearing which they hold in their streets. For the spirit and health and community there is music.

[Aalnanzëthathke'apûgndox - Winterpedia](https://winter.miraheze.org/wiki/Aalnanz%C3%ABthathke%27ap%C3%BBgndox)