---
tags:
  - history
---
The **Exploration of Cqa** by non-inhabitant people took place throughout

# Early accounts
In the centuries following the [[Xiyeru]] discovery of [[T'ugü]], traditionally dated to 67 AGS, maritime navigation to the south of [[Udovuʼo]] increased dramatically. Several accounts of what might be observations of [[Cqa]] were reported in this time, with perhaps the earliest being a 223 report of a merchant crew en route to [[T'ugü]] which was thought to have been lost at sea, but returned to [[Udovuʼo]] after 19 days claiming to have seen "_umugo tan ībaʼaražeʼe_", "hills above the horizon".

By the [[7th century]], the general consensus was that the floating islands were a real geographical feature to the south-west of [[Udovuʼo]] associated with the semi-legendary [[Āžuvuwirō]], but this was not yet considered canonical fact by the [[Xiyeru]] cultural authorities. In 635, [[Rhamari Fīkwaziguma Āeruweʼa]] decreed that its existence must be affirmed, and the [[Eruweʼa]] of [[Erido]] began a campaign to gather and fund a mission to [[Cqa]]. A contemporary [[Xiyeru]] almanac from the following year recorded only that the mission was successful in reaching [[Āžuvuwirō]], consisting of a mixed [[Xiyeru]]-[[Öb]] crew launched from a [[Rhavo todo|Xiyeru settlement in T'ugü]]. This is considered to be the first discovery of [[Cqa]] by the [[Xiyeru]] themselves, though it's almost certain that many [[Xiyeru]] had been accidentally discovering it for hundreds if not thousands of years prior, and the islands had already been inhabited for much longer by the [[Maicqa]].

A few other exploratory voyages were made over the next two decades which confirmed that the legendary clouds were in fact solid islands inhabited by people, before the effort was halted by the [[Exodus period#The Great Sickness (655 AGS)|Great Sickness of 655]], after which there was no further developments for a couple of centuries.
# Revived interest
The [[9th century]] saw the rise of the [[Lavondu]] culture, bearing a new generation of explorers, though mostly accidental, who nonetheless extended their knowledge of the world to include [[Qnōp']], [[Krobu]] and [[Ansang]]. In the [[10th century]], attention was turned again to [[Cqa]] when [[Lavondu]] trading ships returning from [[Udovuʼo]] began to stumble across the islands, leading communities of [[Lavondu]] explorers to organise deliberate missions to [[Cqa]], finding their first successes in the 920s.

The [[Xiyeru Confederation]] briefly became interested in the rediscovery of [[Cqa]], launching three reconnaissance missions in 922 and 923. The first returned unsuccessfully after 35 days, while neither of the latter two returned and were presumed lost in storms. After the loss of two expeditions, political favour swayed against the continuation of the mission and an upcoming fourth voyage was barred from launching.
## Voyages by Hōyecă
In 932, the [[Azodo]]-native ship-builder and navigator [[Hōyecă]], inspired by stories of [[Cqa]] heard around the port city of [[Mamadezirova]], set about acquiring state funding for a [[Lavondu]]-crewed voyage to the floating islands. He was a commoner, but a charismatic and cunning one, who eventually acquired his funds through the formation of friendships with politicians. He was granted supplies for a single voyage in 937, most of which he used to buy the companionship of a [[Lavondu]] tribe who would host him and provide his crew, further supplies, and materials for the construction of two of the largest ships yet built in [[T'ugü]].

In 938, they launched from [[Söjan Bay]] and successfully navigated 800km to the eastern tip of [[Cqa]] after 14 days. After spending two days observing the islands and taking astronomical measurements, they travelled to [[Azodo]], arriving at [[Mamadezirova]] after a total of 26 days at sea.

[[Hōyecă Tŭlihoeʼōikwă|Hōyecă]] and some lesser known navigators went on to lead a few other voyages to [[Cqa]] in the following years, though with no way to access the islands themselves there was little progress in understanding or exploring the phenomenon. On the first day at the islands during one voyage in 946, [[Hōyecă|Hōyecă's]] crew encountered a group of [[Maicqa]] in the midst of a resource-gathering journey known as a [[xgotha]], but nothing could be communicated with them before they returned to their homes in the sky later the same day.

[[Hōyecă]] became determined to establish communication with the [[Maicqa]] and gain access to their islands. In 949, after spending around 20 days in wait, anchored to the remains of a failed island floating on the surface of the sea, he and his crew made face to face contact with a group of [[Maicqa]]. They spent three days together, traded with them, and watched them gather water and fish.

The longest of [[Hōyecă|Hōyecă's]] voyages lasted 951-953, in which he was allowed to ascend to [[Cqa]] as a passenger on a [[flying mollusc]] and live amongst the [[Maicqa]] on some of their smaller, lower-altitude islands. After acclimatising as much as was possible, he learnt to ride the [[flying mollusc|molluscs]] himself, though it was found that they did not survive long at sea level and so could not be transported back to [[Udovuʼo]]. He was likely also the first non-[[Maicqa]] person to learn their language and to study [[plink]], the unusual material which composes most of the volume of each floating island, which he correctly reasoned was the source of their exceptional behaviour. The visitors were not entrusted with acquiring the material themselves, rather the [[Maicqa]] would quarry blocks of the [[Plink#Physical properties|denser, outer plink]] from small, temporary mines, which were quickly sealed off with clay and soil to avoid any significant effect on the island's buoyancy. [[Hōyecă]] acquired several cubic metres of [[plink]] over the years, likely less than his own body mass in total. This was not yet enough for any practical purpose, but was enough to be studied by natural philosophers in [[Udovuʼo]] and continue funding his voyages.

[[Hōyecă]] observed the north-west motion of the islands of [[Cqa]] and set out in 959 to follow their path and determine the full extent of the region. The expedition was lost in the severe storms that continuously plague the open sea of [[Winter]] and [[Hōyecă]] was never seen again. He was posthumously granted [[Nīholu]] by the [[Azodo Government]], founding a noble house beginning with his son [[Ya’ŭxinĭ Hōyecăkī]].