The ***Inbúja Nahan*** (elder sibling declaration) was a trilingual text commissioned in 860 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] by [[Lavondu]] politicians via the [[Zúnton]], but primarily composed by [[Öb]] scribes throughout the following year or so. It was the first substantial text written using the newly created [[Opsíbdañox]] script, being composed in [[Möxali]] and translated into [[Ahōtoli]] and a late literary form of [[Low Alöbi]]. Copies of the text were personally presented to the [[Āeruweʼa]] and the [[Āʼiyoru|five governors of Udovuʼo]] in 861, marking the end of [[Tuvöblin]].

The primary purpose of the text was to declare the peaceful settlement and political independence of the [[Lavondu]] in [[T'ugü]] as a people distinct from the [[Xiyeru]], which the [[Āeruweʼa]] received without dispute. It was believed by many that the statement would be received poorly by the [[Azodo government]], who throughout [[Tuvöblin]] had perceived [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya]] to be acting outside her jurisdiction and potentially prosecuted. Instead, history celebrates her as the founder of a diverse and flourishing nation thanks to the intervention the contemporary [[Āʼiyoru|governor]] of [[Azodo]], [[Kōlăcetĭ]], who benevolently welcomed the declaration.

It also described important aspects of cosmology and theology, such as the creation of the world and humanity, and how [[Öb]] ideas were reconciled with the traditional [[Xiyeru]] canon in the formation of the [[Lavondu]] culture. The text characterises the [[Xiyeru]] as an older sibling of the [[Öb]], using this metaphor to contextualise historical relations between the two cultures. The theme of asymmetric duality is present throughout, being explicitly related to the [[Winter#Moons|moons of Winter]], for example.

The Inbúja Nahan was symbolic of not just the [[Lavondu]] culture, but of the completion of [[Tuvöblin]] and the profound effect this was about to have on the world. This was already being recognised by contemporary [[Lavondu]] historians, who declared a new historical period beginning that same year, known as *[[Thousand rivers period|oríxayija nayam]]* (thousand rivers period).