***Nejinayon*** ([[Möxali]]) or *fana’ayo mūʼoyo* ([[Xiri]]) is the ritual recital of [[Xiyeru]] lore. It was traditionally an oral tradition of storytelling, but since the invention of writing (c. 500 [[Universal calendar|BGS]]) it has also included the transcription of lore and reproduction of historical almanacs.
# Etymology
The traditional [[Xiri]] term *fana’ayo mu’oyo* can be glossed as `ACT-speak-CONT past-ACC`, meaning literally "continually speaking the past".
# Lavondu restoration
In the [[9th century]] [[Universal calendar|AGS]], [[Möxali]]-speaking [[Xiyeru]] communities in [[T'ugü]] undertook a vast project of cultural preservation, reformation and reorganisation known as [[Tuvöblin]], commonly taken to be the beginning of the [[Lavondu]] culture. This period of history is also known as the **Lavondu restoration**, as it involved the reinstitution and standardisation of several important Xiyeru cultural traditions which had diminished throughout the [[Exodus period]].

One important step of this process was the formal definition of a [[Öcídñox|generalised astronomical calendar]] and the subsequent chronolisation of historical records. The previous ~1400 years of written [[Xiyeru]] history did not record actual dates, but detailed calendrical information nonetheless. This allowed contemporary [[Xiyeru]] scholars to calculate specific dates for major events and calibrate the chronology. The entirety of the known history of the world was arranged into discrete eras, each named for an important establishing event. The complete, assembled history covers several millennia and includes many eras which are internally structured, but unable to be definitely positioned with respect to the others.