Elghëday is a city located in the [[Central Highlands]] of [[Oksandanderi]]. The city played an important role for the economy of [[Makhatganda]]. For most of its existence Elghëday was merely a village or a small town along the [[Yarlamuññe]] lake. The harsh mountainous environment would not allow it to grow much. In its early days some soldiers were stationed in a garrison there to guard the Makhatganda against raids from other mountain tribes. This changed after the [[Embassy of Peace and Friendship]] began the northern trade between Makhatganda and [[Irimri]] in 856. For the following two centuries Elghëday grew to the size of a small city and acquired riches. 

The golden age of Elghëday would come to an end with the [[Makhat-Kalotgane War]] in the 1070s. After the dissolution of the Makhatganda, the city became the capital of the [[Northern Government at Elghëday|Northern Government]], a rebellious rump state, which formed after the surrender of the [[Council of Thirty]]. The Northern Government was also supported by the [[Tyon-Arat]]. For a few years, Elghëday formed a successful resistance until the year 1088. Since the war, the trade had basically stopped and the city was beginning to run low on resources, given its otherwise meager environment. A particularly dry year spelled doom for Elghëday, as the city was threatened by a famine and was forced to surrender as well. Afterwards, the city could recover slightly, as would the northern trade, but within the larger [[Empire of Kalotgane]] it would not rise to prominence again. 