## the mineralogy of rime (by a renowned lkoa₂ geologist) 
you tall and scary people keep coming and asking me about whether rime has any interesting rocks. i don't like you because you are scary and talk too much. i will tell you about all of the interesting rocks and sands and dirts in rime, and then you will not come back here again, because you will have no more questions. the ground in rime is made of sand and dirt and rock, from top to bottom. sometimes there's no dirt and sometimes the dirt is frozen, and sometimes the ground has water in it and large stones. sand is the kind of ground where you lick it and it prickles on your tongue, but you can shake it out of your fur. dirt can also be prickly but mainly it just gets in your mouth when you lick it, like new snow. rock is ground that doesn't stick to your tongue when you lick it because it's too heavy. i can only think of one interesting dirt. sometimes dirt is brown and sometimes it is greyyellowish but it is rarely yellow or white. but sometimes around rivers there is a kind of yellow or whiteyellowish dirt that smells swamplike. this dirt is interesting because plants can't grow in it. if you want to make a clear area you can use this dirt. there are a lot of interesting sands. in some places, people find sand with some grains that shine like ice, and are the brilliant yellow of spring leaves. i think it would be nice to use for sand art, but i don't have any. i told some people to go look for them west up the mountain though so maybe they have some. that was two winters ago i think. okay i don't want to talk anymore. you will come back in three days and i will tell you about more interesting rocks and sands.
i was hoping you had forgotten to come back but now that you are here i will keep telling you about sand and rock. some thirty dens to the east maybe there is a den made out of sand that is always warm. i think nobody lives there now but you will still not tear it down. this is the only den i have heard of like that so maybe that is a lie. the only other interesting sands are the ones that are interesting colors. there is very white sand and i think it is just the sand form of the foggy ice rocks. like the foggy ice rocks it is sometimes also brown or blue. there are some dark brown sands that smell nauseating and make you sick, but they are only deep and near rivers, so you will not worry about finding them. the most interesting rock is the foggy ice rock. it looks like foggy ice but it is a rock, and it doesn't melt in the summer. sometimes it has a nice taste to lick but usually it is just fake ice. sometimes there is ice rock that is less foggy, and you can see through it a little. these ones can also be blue or brown, and if you look through them everything else will look blue or brown too. usually foggy ice rock comes in shapes like many-days-old frozen snow, but sometimes it comes in little pebbles, which i like more. i also heard that there are rocks that look like water does when the sky is grey. i don't know anything about these rocks other than that they're in the mountains and they taste like blood. there are two cursed things that you will avoid: the flea sand and the evil birchbark. sometimes when rivers dry up for good, then the next summer you can dig deep there and find flea sand. it seems light, but if you lick it it will cling to your tongue tightly, and maybe slide down into your throat and get stuck there. if you try to shake it out of your fur, it will burrow into your skin, like fleas do. the only way to get it off is to find very still water and stand completely still in it. if it's on your tongue you must bathe your tongue as well.
evil birchbark is a covering that rock has sometimes on mountains. it is soft and comes apart into twine easily, the way birchbark does, but attacks your nose. you can tell it is near if it feels like the inside of your nose is itching. if your nose is itching and you find a rock that looks like it has frost on it, that is the evil birchbark. you won't breathe, and you will get away from it and fill in the hole as fast as you can. you will tell other people about the evil birchbark. i know three dens that have a place where you can't dig because there is evil birchbark there. okay that's everything i have to say about sand and dirt and rocks. you will go away now.
**strange thing #12: "someone else fungus"** okay so yesterday i said i would talk about another strange thing around here. this is the twelfth strange thing i have talked about i think, which is a lot and i don't think i will talk about any more of them. i call this thing the "someone else fungus". it's too big and maybe too smart to keep track of, but it's easy to get ahold of. it's in the soil everywhere you look. you just dig in silty dirt and you will find a white web of fungus, and that's probably it. the web covers all of the forest you can see from high up on this mountain. i don't know where it ends, so it is very very big. here and there it grows white mushrooms, usually on dead wood. usually when you eat mushrooms, either nothing happens or you feel sick. but if you eat the mushrooms of the someone else fungus, you will start having extra thoughts in your head. it is hard to tell where they come from, and this will happen for days and you will be confused and overwhelmed all the time. but you will also become smarter. you will know much more about the terrain than you knew before. you will be able to think, and see yourself from far away, as if from the top of a mountain, seeing all the forest and all the soil around you. you will know what the soil is like beneath your paws without even digging.
The extra thoughts feel like they're your thoughts but they're not yours. they are actually the thoughts of the someone else fungus. it is hard to tell what the someone else fungus is thinking when it's in the soil. but when it's in your head, it is very surprised to be a fox, and asks a lot of annoying questions about being a fox. it tells you to go out and explore things and do fox things, because these are very interesting things for it. it also has some bigger questions that foxes can't answer, like where the soil comes from and what the sky is made of. i think the someone else fungus in the soil must have a lot of very big questions that it can't answer because it's a fungus and not a fox. after about four days, the extra thoughts will start getting quieter, and a day or two later they will be gone. the fungus in your head will be very sad that it's going away and will tell you to eat more of the someone else fungus's mushrooms. but you will not do that, because it will make the fungus thoughts loud again. i don't know what happens if you keep eating the fungus for a long time but i don't think it's good. people who eat the fungus smell like it, so you will smell like the fungus all the time and that is already unpleasant.

-----
**strange thing #12: "someone else fungus"** okay so yesterday i said i would talk about another strange thing around here. this is the twelfth strange thing i have talked about i think, which is a lot and i don't think i will talk about any more of them. i call this thing the "someone else fungus". it's too big and maybe too smart to keep track of, but it's easy to get ahold of. it's in the soil everywhere you look. you just dig in silty dirt and you will find a white web of fungus, and that's probably it. the web covers all of the forest you can see from high up on this mountain. i don't know where it ends, so it is very very big. here and there it grows white mushrooms, usually on dead wood. usually when you eat mushrooms, either nothing happens or you feel sick. but if you eat the mushrooms of the someone else fungus, you will start having extra thoughts in your head. it is hard to tell where they come from, and this will happen for days and you will be confused and overwhelmed all the time. but you will also become smarter. you will know much more about the terrain than you knew before. you will be able to think, and see yourself from far away, as if from the top of a mountain, seeing all the forest and all the soil around you. you will know what the soil is like beneath your paws without even digging. 
the extra thoughts feel like they're your thoughts but they're not yours. they are actually the thoughts of the someone else fungus. it is hard to tell what the someone else fungus is thinking when it's in the soil. but when it's in your head, it is very surprised to be a fox, and asks a lot of annoying questions about being a fox. it tells you to go out and explore things and do fox things, because these are very interesting things for it. it also has some bigger questions that foxes can't answer, like where the soil comes from and what the sky is made of. i think the someone else fungus in the soil must have a lot of very big questions that it can't answer because it's a fungus and not a fox. after about four days, the extra thoughts will start getting quieter, and a day or two later they will be gone. the fungus in your head will be very sad that it's going away and will tell you to eat more of the someone else fungus's mushrooms. but you will not do that, because it will make the fungus thoughts loud again. i don't know what happens if you keep eating the fungus for a long time but i don't think it's good. people who eat the fungus smell like it, so you will smell like the fungus all the time and that is already unpleasant. okay i am done talking about the someone else fungus. 

