The **Nīholu** was a [[Xiyeru]] sociopolitical caste which first emerged in the [[Xiyeru Confederation]] in the [[9th century]] and continued in some form throughout the [[Lavondu]] world for over a millennium thereafter. Nīholu culture arose naturally out of the inter-family politics which had developed among the [[Azodo Government|Azodo Government's]] ever more intricate bureaucratic systems in the [[9th century|9th]] and [[10th century|10th]] centuries, and was subsequently recognised and supported by the [[Xiyeru Confederation|Xiyeru state]] via its elite universities.
# Etymology
*Nīholu* is a compound of the adverb *nī* "well" and the verb root *ho* "to bear", with the person suffix *-lu*. This could be interpreted as "well-born-person", but perhaps a better translation is actually "well-burdened-person", as it was considered that it was the Nīholu's onus to deal with politics so that the common person need not.

The [[Ahōtoli]] word *nīholu* was loaned into [[Möxali]] as *níqol*, which is the more common and widespread term found throughout history.
# Role in society
Nīholu was a hereditary privilege passed down from a mother to her children, but could also be acquired either by being accepted into and receiving an education from a prestigious [[Xiyeru Confederation|state]]-run university, or by special decree of the [[Eruweʼa]] priesthood. In 883, the Nīholu became recognised by law as an elevated type of citizenship, granting special rights like the ability to participate in elections and free movement between the [[Udovuʼo|islands]] and beyond without requiring state approval. The aforementioned methods which could induct a person into the Nīholu came to require lengthy, and costly, legislative procedures.

Being part of the Nīholu did not allow a person to own land or another person as property, both of which were totally forbidden by the ancient law code which long predated the creation of the state, or really acquire any kind of personal wealth at all, since the [[Xiyeru Confederation]] was founded on the principle of opposition to private ownership. Regardless, the Nīholu did tend to live much more comfortably than the common populace simply due to their extra freedom and ability to directly support themselves using the public wealth.