The [[Xiyeru]] distinguished three gender groups, female, male, and a third gender, which broadly dictated certain societal roles. Gender roles were strictly upheld, but they did inform restrictive cultural aspects like the always-female [[Āeruweʼa]] and male-line political inheritance.
# Female
Women generally held de facto power through spiritual leadership roles like the [[Eruweʼa]] and [[Āeruweʼa]]. Ancestry was typically traced through matrilineal lines, and the mother's name was an important part of the [[ńuʼu]].
# Male
Male gender roles traditionally encompassed ceremonial political activities. The five governorships, and certain other important political offices, were patrilineal-hereditary positions in the traditional Xiyeru political system, converse but parallel to the the usual practice of tracking ancestry matrilineally. Politics was always a man's game, though they held no real power and really their job was just to show up at important ceremonies and ritually move debts around between tribes.
# Third gender
The [[Xiyeru]] third gender is called *myogiru* "among women" or *yādagiru* "appearing women" in [[Xiri]], with the former being the basis of the equivalent [[Ahōtoli]] and [[Möxali]] terms *nekĭlu* and *mísul* respectively. It encompasses a broad range of non-binary gender identities which often align more with feminine than masculine expression, and is socially associated with a stronger spiritual connection of the body, blood and spirit to their corresponding worldly materials. Third gender people were considered to have a connection to medicine, and more broadly with the study of the natural world.