**Āžuvuwirō** is a semi-legendary location or phenomena in [[Xiyeru folklore]], generally described as a blanket of dark clouds which can block out the sun, depriving the world of life. It was perhaps inspired by ancient observations of the floating islands of [[Cqa]], and later in history became explicitly identified with contemporary knowledge of the islands, which  continued to be known colloquially as *Āžuvuwirō* in [[Xiri]].
# Etymology
The term *Āžuvuwirō* [aːˈʒuvuˌwiɾoː] is the common name used in [[Xiri|Standard Xiri]] c. [[Universal calendar|year 0]], a compound of *ā-* "great" + *xuvu* "dark, as of night" + *wirō* "cloud cover".
# Description and interpretation
Descriptions of Āžuvuwirō differ from place to place and throughout history, but all generally characterise it as a dark blanket or mass of clouds which occurs above the sea somewhere near [[Udovuʼo]].

The earliest written account of Āžuvuwirō is from the 5th century BGS, one passage of which reads ⟨NFPHKPWPXʼ⟩, representing something like "*no fa pa ahē kapo ūpaxeʼe*" in the language of the period, literally "has been made/positioned against the sun". This has been variously interpreted as meaning it blocks all sun from the ground, that it can be found towards the south or west, or that it predates the existence of the sun itself.

Some of the more fantastical stories of Āžuvuwirō involve hostile people descending from the clouds, or driving them like carts behind flying oxen, in some cases attacking or stealing from sailors. Belief in Āžuvuwirō usually involves a mixture of these interpretations.

These ideas contributed to the long held belief that the sea to the south of [[Udovuʼo]] is plagued by constant danger and should not be sailed, which likely held back the [[Xiyeru]] discovery of [[T'ugü]] by over a millennium.
## Connection to Cqa
Āžuvuwirō may ultimately be a mystification of ancestral knowledge of [[Cqa]], "islands" of solid material which float in the air for centuries before descending into the sea, inhabited by the [[Maicqa]] people. These may have appeared as dark clouds to ancient sailors and been assumed to be an area of continuous storms to be avoided.

Throughout the first few centuries AGS, [[Exploration of Cqa#Early historical accounts|various accounts by sailors]] travelling between [[Udovuʼo]] and [[T'ugü]] appeared to suggest observations of [[Cqa]], which were typically associated with Āžuvuwirō. Encounters were uncommon and accidental, but by the 7th century Āžuvuwirō was generally considered to be associated with a known geographical feature to the south-west of [[Udovuʼo]]. In 636, a mixed [[Xiyeru]]-[[Öb]] crew launched from [[T'ugü]] became the first to affirm the existence of [[Cqa]], which continued to be known colloquially as Āžuvuwirō in [[Udovuʼo]] for centuries thereafter.