One of the most characteristic and persistent elements of the [[Xiyeru]] culture is their tattoos, which took many forms and styles throughout their history, some of which spread to other cultures, most notably the [[Lavondu]]. There were many types of tattoo that could be given to a person for a variety of reasons, such as certain points in their life, in recognition of good deeds, or just purely cosmetics.

Tattoos were broadly referred to as *(u)ńaʼay* "marking(s)", a word also applied to writing, which later in history can be seen in the forms *ńaʼai* and *ńaʼe*. Tattooists were called *ńaʼayeru* "marking-person", which was a sacred role handled only by a small handful of elders in the village.
# Wōjama
The most widely recognised and practiced type of [[Xiyeru]] tattoo was a series of maturity-warding tattoos that every person received in accordance with age rituals. These were called the *wōjama* (“may-(you)-be-wells”). They symbolise wellness and good wishes. Note that all ages listed below follow the [[Xiyeru#Age system|Xiyeru age system]] which counts the number of 385-day calendar rounds a person has lived through.
## Wōmavanaʼa
The first set of wōjama is a series of mouth tattoos called the *wōmavanaʼa* (“may-(you)-speak-wells”) that one gets at the age of 9. These vary by region; however, one similarity is that they all have lines coming from the mouth to the nose. These lines may be colored in or not; they are almost always straight (with at least one recorded exception in a distant village). These tattoos are meant to ward off angry spirits that may cause someone to yell or verbally hurt their fellow person.
## Wōmajanēs
The second is a series of feet and ankle tattoos called the *wōmajanēs* (“may-(you)-step-wells”) that one receives when they turn 15. These are meant to symbolise good luck in one's travels on solid land.
## Wōmavuru
When one turns 16 they receive the most important series of hand, wrist, and forearm tattoos called the *wōmavuru* (“may-(you)-do-good-works”); many regions are known to have intricate and detailed back-of-hand tattoos, 3 blacked out bars on the wrist (of body, spirit, and blood), and intricately done forearm tattoos. The portions of the tattoo done on the hand are known to fade, so it is commonplace for these tattoos to be touched up and reworked as time passes. It is very taboo for a person to allow these tattoos to become egregiously faded.
## Wōmavawiʼi
The second to last series of tattoos is received when one turns 25. They are a series of forehead and eye-area tattoos that are called the *wōmavawiʼi* (“may-(you)-see-wells”). As one gets older they become a more trusted hunter and [[Sailing in Fountainhead#Ancient Xiyeru ships|boat-person]], this tattoo is meant to ensure that they are well focused and ready on the sea whenever it is needed.
## Wōmajazava
The last set of chest, back and calf tattoos, *wōmajazava* (“may-(you)-die-wells”) or *wōmajamoyu* (“may-(you)-sleep-wells”) is received when one is nearing their death. It is meant to symbolise one's connection with nature, the deities, one's community, and the [[Āeruweʼa]].
# Other tattoos
There are other various tattoos that one can get when they perform various acts of bravery. These are called *ugumamavuru* (“many-many-very-good-deeds”).

Parental tattoos are called *uweʼańaʼay* (“river-markings”) and are meant to symbolise the parent's connection with the river deity (goddess of parenting, leadership, and rivers).

Kinship tattoos are called the *weruńaʼay* (“peoples-markings”), and these are meant to symbolise one's tribe, mother, and region. Due to the [[Xiyeru|Xiyeru's]] tendency to travel far from their home village on foot or by boat, it is very important that these tattoos relate individually to one's home village as it is seen as incredibly rude to your ancestors to forget your home. Not only do these tattoos tell others where they are from, as a sense of pride in your home village, but they also remind one of their home, so they never become too homesick during travels.