The [[Xiyeru]] considered the *[[Ńaʼay|uńáʼay]]* "tattoos" their primary mode of personal expression and identification, and used *uńuʼu* "names" as a verbal reflection of the tattoos. The uńuʼu can be understood as using the medium of language to express the [[Ńaʼay|uńaʼay]], and to some extent, a person's name could be read through their tattoos. It was said that if a [[Xiyeru]] individual is given the full name of a person in the next village over to go and meet, they could pretty well identify them by sight alone. A person had several names which were strung together in sequence to form their full uńuʼu. Different parts of the name are used in different contexts, with the full uńuʼu used only in very particular rituals and historical records.
# Parts of the name
## Sańuʼu
At birth, a person received their *sańuʼu* "small-name" from their mother. The sańuʼu was picked from a handful of short, generic names that everyone used. There were different names for boys and girls and parents tended not to pick a name they had already used for a previous child. It was somewhat taboo for people other than the parents to refer to someone by their sańuʼu, people would instead refer to children indirectly using their mother's name, like "[mother's xińuʼu]'s son" or something similar.
## Xińuʼu
After a person received their [[Ńaʼay#Wōmavanaʼa|wōmavanaʼa]] "may-you-speak-well" tattoos on their 9th or 10th age day, they chose their own *xińuʼu* "true-name" which replaced the sańuʼu, though everyone still retained their mother's xińuʼu as part of their uńuʼu. The xińuʼu is the name that everyone would call them by, and everyone had the opportunity to change their xińuʼu at each of the other coming of age rituals at ages 14, 15/16 and 25.

It was common for a person to change their xińuʼu to something related to their particular interests or field of work on their third coming of age ritual at the age of 15 or 16, when they received their [[Ńaʼay#Wōmavuru|wōmavuru]] "may-you-do-good-works" tattoos. Unlike the sańuʼu, the xińuʼu wasn't gendered and can really be anything at all, most people just make up a unique xińuʼu. If a person did wish to change their xińuʼu as part of a later age rite, they could also choose to name themself after another person, usually an ancestor, so long as that person was no longer living. Doing so was not taken lightly, since it meant not only adopting someone's xińuʼu, but their *[[Xiyeru#mūʼoru|muʼoru]]* "legacy spirit", and not living up to the mū’oru was very disrespectful.
## Weruńuʼu
At some point in their coming of age, a person would be bestowed with their [[Ńaʼay#Other tattoos|weruńaʼay]] "people-markings", and a *weruńuʼu* "people-name" to go with it. This was a name used by all members of a community to identify themselves, but children did not receive it automatically. What constituted a "community" here was essentially defined by the use of weruńuʼu, it was often a single village but could represent smaller or larger groups.
## Weʼańuʼu
Upon becoming a parent, a person was given a title called a *weʼańuʼu* "river-name" which was associated with the [[Ńaʼay#Other tattoos|uweʼańaʼay]] "river-markings" tattoos given to all parents. Every mother was given the title *egiruweʼa*, and every father *eńiruweʼa*, these literally mean "mother" and "father" (and were actually phonetically identical after the [[1st century]]). Important elders were considered parents to the whole village, and had their eruweʼańuʼu changed to the generic *eruweʼa* "parent". The spiritual and political head of all [[Xiyeru]] peoples held the title *[[Āeruweʼa]]* "big-parent".
# Umamavuruńuʼu
Names were also given for each exceptional act of bravery or achievement commemorated with the [[Ńaʼay#Other tattoos|ugumamavuru]] "many-many-very-good-deeds" tattoos. These names were called *(ug)umamavuruńuʼu* "(many-)very-good-deed-names" and were usually of the form [verb]-[noun] meaning "one-who-[verb]s-[noun]".

While the tattoos were updated to reflect a person's continued achievements throughout their life, a singular name was typically kept which reflected each particular "discipline" as it were, though they could have multiple umamavuruńuʼu for different things. For example, someone who had defended their village from several attacks from [[Īdoskare]] (a panther-like creature) could have a tattoo for each encounter, but a single good-deed-name *Fowīdoskare* "one-who-slays-[[Īdoskare]]".
## Mūʼojūńuʼu
When a person received their [[Ńaʼay#Wōmajazava|wōmajazava]] "may-you-die-well" tattoos, they are also bestowed with a *mūʼojūńuʼu* "forever-name" by their family. If a person dies unexpectedly, they are still given a mūʼojūńuʼu after death. The mūʼojūńuʼu is often longer than the other parts of the name and aims to honor the connection that a person has forged with the world and the people around them over their whole lifetime. After death, a person is typically referred to by their mūʼojūńuʼu.