The [[Dictionary of Hüm Kiinfe Haankaysiw#uunko|Uunko]] `(Hüm Kiinfe /ˈuːn.ko/ [ˈuːŋ.go])` is a migratory bird found in the [[Haankay Steppe]] of [[K'tlagn]]. They stay on the Haankay Steppe in the warmer months, and migrate to [[T'ugü|warmer areas]] in the colder months; Uunko usually stick around areas of freshwater such as rivers, streams, and lakes, where they incubate their eggs in places they can hide whilst still having the option to be on lookout. As such, one can follow a flock of Uunko migrating towards the Haankay Steppe to find sources of freshwater. They are a species of Crane, and are 142cm tall on average. The head of an Uunko is stark white with eyes of orange-red-pink colour, though crimson eyes are the most common. The white continues and narrows into a thin strip on both sides of the neck that forms the border between the light blue top side and the darker underside of the bird, which can range from dark blue to black to dark purple.

The Uunko are omnivorous animals. They eat buds, small riverside mammals, fish, insects, and other creatures that burrow. Their long thin beaks are good at getting into small burrows, deeper into water, and for sifting through tall grass. Because Uunko tend to move and stay in flocks of decent size, when hunting them there is usually enough options to go for, such that a hunter can go recklessly chasing them on horseback and still get a meal. However, ideal Uunko hunting is done on foot, or via Eagle. Uunko nests tend to have a small amount of eggs in them, it is Haankaysiw tradition to only take one egg per nest, and never take the last egg from a nest when searching for food so that Uunko can continue to breed.

As resources are scarce on the Steppe, when an Uunko is a hunted all of it is used. The three different colours of feathers are taken for decorative and archery purposes, the bones are taken to make jewelry with, and all of the components are traded between [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw tribes]] and with neighbours.