The **Great Syzygy** was an astronomical event which marks the beginning of the [[Universal calendar|AGS]] period, in which the [[Sun]], the planet [[Winter]] and its [[Winter#Moons|two moons]] were in alignment on [[Winter|Winter's]] winter solstice. The [[Winter#Moons|moons]] were both on the opposite side of the [[Winter|planet]] to the [[sun]], meaning both were full and in conjunction in [[Winter|Winter's]] night sky.
# Universal time
The exact moment of conjunction was chosen as the zero point for the [[Universal calendar]], since this rare coincidence of important astronomical cycles makes an ideal reference point when comparing and converting between other calendars. The line of longitude which was pointing away from the [[sun]] and towards the [[Winter#Moons|moons]] at the moment of conjunction was taken to be the line of zero longitude, therefore the [[Great Syzygy]] is defined as occurring at midnight on day zero in universal time. Note that the period of 24 hours following the [[Great Syzygy|syzygy]] is day zero in [[Universal calendar|universal time]], but more commonly referred to as day 1 of [[Universal calendar|year 0]].
# Frequency of conjunction
[[Winter|Winter's]] [[Winter#Moons|moons]] align in a double full conjunction approximately every 192 days. Since this is independent of [[Winter|Winter's]] orbit around the [[sun]], the double full conjunction is equally likely to fall on any day of the year. It follows that an event like the [[Great Syzygy]] should occur every 192 years on average. In fact, similar events tend to occur with gaps of 172, 185, 330 or 515 years, but are not as closely aligned. For example, a double full conjunction occurred on the final day of 184 [[Universal calendar|AGS]], the day before the 185 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] winter solstice, while in 515 the events fell on the same night, but [[Bigmoon]] had technically reached its true full phase the night before. Another close alignment, a double full conjunction on the morning of the second day of 687 [[Universal calendar|AGS]], was shortly followed by the only other true realignment in recorded history, on the solstice of 700 [[Universal calendar|AGS]]. Note that while such an event may still be called a great syzygy, the name "[[Great Syzygy]]" properly refers only the 0 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] alignment.

Some years hosting similar astronomical events are listed below:
- 607, 1994: Double full moon conjunction on the summer solstice.
- 653, 1340: Double new moon conjunction on the autumnal equinox.
- 693, 1393: Double new moon conjunction on the summer solstice.
- 39, 739, 1439: Double full moon conjunction on the autumnal equinox.
- 786, 1486: Double new moon conjunction on the winter solstice.
# Astronomical observation
The primary calendar used by the [[Xiyeru]] is based around the cycle of the double full moon conjunction, called *ūžāwiʼivāń* "whole-eye-moon" in [[Xiri]]. The [[Great Syzygy]] of 0 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] was recorded by contemporary [[Xiyeru]] astronomers, who noted that the ūžāwiʼivāń had unusually fallen on the night of the winter solstice, but since the solar calendar was not in common use, this alignment was not considered of as much importance as other events in the lunar calendar.

The coincidental alignment of various events on the solar and lunar calendars in the [[7th century]] was noticed by [[Xiyeru]] astronomers, who, in the 690s, subsequently predicted the 700 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] syzygy. Its arrival was heralded by some as a good omen marking a new time of prosperity in the wake of the [[Exodus period#The Great Hunger (656 - 664 AGS)|famine of 656-664 AGS]]. This likely influenced the formation of the [[Azodo government]], which is thought to have first assembled in 700 or 701 [[Universal calendar|AGS]].