**Soundquakes** are an unusual earthquake-like physical phenomenon unique to the planet [[Winter]]. Whereas an earthquake has inaudible vibrational frequencies in the range 0.1-20Hz, a soundquake typically has its peak frequency above 20Hz and can have frequencies as high as 300Hz, well within the range of human hearing and speech. They are much shorter and lower amplitude than earthquakes and are usually not felt, but rather faintly heard as short bursts of mostly white noise rumbling with a main pitch for up to a few seconds, or as a low echoing ping. Some particularly strong soundquakes, especially those with a lower frequency spectrum, can be felt as a physical vibration.

The actual sound of the quake itself is quiet and can easily go unnoticed in a noisy environment. The most noticeable effect of a soundquake is that it causes objects to resonate at audible frequencies. Like how blowing across the top of a bottle produces white noise, then the bottle has a natural frequency which is selected from the noise spectrum and amplified. When a sound quake occurs, musical instruments, pots and pans, even buildings can start to hum at their respective particular frequencies, and sometimes continue for a while after the soundquake burst has ended.

Soundquakes are generally associated with seismic activity, so places which experience conventional earthquakes also experience soundquakes, which are actually much more common. They are heard most clearly near seismic epicentres in vast open areas, such as volcanic islands or wide, deep valleys surrounded by mountains along fault lines. Earthquakes tend to be accompanied by a subsequent period of increased soundquakes, but soundquakes can also occur with no apparent cause.

[[Udovuʼo]] is a volcanically and seismically active region, though it doesn't have exceptionally many earthquakes, but is among the soundquakiest places in the world, where they can sometimes be heard several times a day. The [[Xiyeru]] never recognised soundquakes to originate in the ground like earthquakes (if that is indeed where they come from), rather common wisdom held that they are carried across the sea from distant lands. In [[Xiri]], they were simply called *(u)hāmizunu* "message(s)".

The [[Xiyeru]] often took care in the design of musical instruments to make them more susceptible to resonance, and homes were commonly adorned with chimes of certain lengths known to resonate well. A certain type of shrine called a *[[Xiyeru#Music|fažibi-rom]]* "singing-table" was built specifically and precisely to pick out harmonic sets of frequencies from soundquakes.