A **bineb** is a familial community which acts as the principal societal unit in [[T'ugü]].
# Name
*Bineb* is a [[Low Alöbi]] term formed from the verb root *bin-* "to accumulate, gather up" and the person forming suffix *-(e)b*, thus literally means an accumulation of people. The term continued to be used in the [[Möxali]] language as *bíneb* or *bínev*, while the equivalent [[High Alöbi]] term is *penep* or *pemp*.
# Structure
A typical bineb is a large family of around 10-30 people. These units were usually not independent or self-sustaining, but rather relied on friendships and trade with other nearby families. If one family has no [[cimcim]] farmers for example, they would have to rely on another with extra produce. Such families were quite broadly distributed, with no particularly dense population centres but often many neighbouring groups.

Much of the family would be genetically related, but this was not a prerequisite for joining the family. Rather, a person from one bineb could join an acquainted bineb by forming a partnership called *klijet* or *klicteb* with a member of that bineb, similar to a marriage. This partnership was not necessarily romantic or sexual, though it often was, but children would generally only be born of these partnerships, and they usually lasted for most, if not all of a person's life. A klijet could be formed between any two people who had reached adulthood and was very much a symmetric relationship, with the only asymmetry being that one person would leave their home family to join another.
# Mök'a bixay
As for what is considered adulthood, the traditional [[Öb]] idea is that a person's life is split into four quarters, called *(mök'a) bixay* "the four quarters (of aging)". Progression from one quarter of life into the next was really the only time [[Öb]] would see any significant change in lifestyle, but it was rarely marked by much in the way of coming of age rituals. These quarters were to be "completed" within a determined time frame, often taken to be 25 [[Winter#Length of the year|years]], though this varied a lot. Ultimately it was up to the individual and their community to decide when to transition to the next stage of life, and it was not uncommon for people to progress through the early life stages a fair bit quicker. Communities tended to organise themselves into four corresponding age groups, with each group having particular responsibilities and relationships with the other groups:
- **int'ib**  —  Children, no particular roles or responsibilities except grow up.
- **ümök'**  —  Once it was decided that a child had matured, they become *ümök'* "grown up" and may start taking on real responsibilities like farming, hunting and building. An ümok' should also act as a role model and teacher for the older int'ib.
- **ina**  —  At this age a person may choose to have children, which may mean leaving the family to join another. Ina would continue to work, but were also responsible for raising and caring for the youngest children in the bineb and preparing the ümök' to be ina themselves. They were authority figures for all younger people.
- **indöl**  —  *Indöl* means something like "guide", owing to the sage-like role they assumed in the bineb. While a person may choose to continue to keep working well into their indöl years, they were expected to retire before age 100 and dedicate their remaining years to further developing the invaluable wisdom they had accumulated over their lifetime, and sharing that wisdom with the bineb.

The groups were not particularly rigid and mostly just served to provide some relationship structure to the bineb, though these relationships did come with some taboos. For example, having children with someone who was raised in the same *bineb* (whether they were genetically related or not) or leaving the *bineb* to join another soon after reaching ümök'hood, i.e. without spending an appreciable time teaching the *int'ib*.