**Ihk'at'ek** are mythical beings in [[Öb]] folklore, described as giant people with ornately decorated bodies. The name comes from the name comes from *iha* "feathery" and *k'at'ek* "giant". K'at'ek are referenced in many myths and their interpretation varies between places and even families, but they are generally recognised as large humanoids who are separate entities to the [[Öb]].

[[Öb]] myths often have no clear position in time. Some are implied to have taken place long in the past but act as prophecy, while others are explicitly suggested to occur cyclically, having already happened and being yet to occur infinitely many times. One such example is that of the Ihk'at'ek, a being or group of beings which is said to at some point in time, take the sea up onto the land thereby bringing about *[[Jailgei]]*, the end of the world.

The number of Ihk'at'ek is unspecified, some people consider it a single deity while others believe them to be an entire people. In fact, most [[Öb]] myths are told with vague language which can be quite freely interpreted. For example the use of *iha*, which can mean ornate, and not *ihihda*, which explicitly means feathered. Another name, *aguson dumij* "sea bringers", uses the verb root *-dum-*, which can vary between "give", "take", "receive" or "bring". Even *[[Jailgei]]* refers not to the whole world but to land as separate from the sea *-gü*, and *jail* doesn't mean "end" but "boundary" or "extremity".

There are some identifiable similarities between the Ihk'at'ek and the [[Fururūʼupwa|Xiyeru creation myth]]. The [[Xiyeru]] tell of *[[Fururūʼupwa]]*, an infinitely large being whose body is covered in [[ńaʼay|tattoos]] which depict the entirety of possible history, who is said to have created the land, the sea, and the [[Xiyeru]]. If one were to interpret [[Jailgei]] as simply being the physical boundary of the land and the sea, and the ornately decorated giant Ihk'at'ek as the architect of such a separation, then the resemblance is clear. The folklore of both the [[Öb]] and the [[Xiyeru]] also considered people to have been created out of clay by a single almighty entity, though this is unrelated to the Ihk'at'ek and could well be a coincidence.