**Klicet** /klitʃet/, also known as **klijet** or **klicteb**, is a partnership of two people in traditional [[Öb]] society, similar to marriage. This partnership was not necessarily romantic or sexual, though it often was, but children would generally only be born of these partnerships, and they usually lasted for most, if not all of a person's life. A klicet could be formed between any two people who had reached adulthood and was very much a symmetric relationship, with the only asymmetry being that one person would leave their home family to join another.
# Restrictions
A klicet may only be formed between two people of the same [[Bineb#Mök'a bixay|age group]] and belonging to different [[bineb]] families. Though marrying within the [[bineb]] was forbidden, neighbouring friendly [[bineb]] can have lots of connections between them, essentially acting as a single genetic pool. Genetic relationships can be tricky to keep track of in such a situation, so are not really considered. Instead, a much more important taboo is upheld, whereby a person may not marry someone with the same [[Öb personal names#Mölo|mölo]], a special generational name. This doesn't mean that marriages have age gaps since the [[Öb personal names#Mölo|mölo]] used in different [[bineb]] are not synchronised, people of the same age may be mostly called *K'abah* "the mountains" in one [[bineb]] and *Böxök* "the river" in the next one over. When a person joins their partner's [[bineb]], they also add their [[Öb personal names#Mölo|mölo]] to their own name in front of their birth [[Öb personal names#Mölo|mölo]] (not replacing it), establishing them as a member of their new family.