**Öb mythology** is the canon of myths and legends passed down by generations of [[Öb]], with connections to other systems of religion and lore in [[Fountainhead]]. [[Öb]] myths often have no clear position in time. Some are implied to have taken place long in the past but act as prophecy, while others are explicitly suggested to occur cyclically, having already happened and being yet to occur infinitely many times.
# Ihk'at'ek
Ihk'at'ek are mythical beings in [[Öb]] folklore, described as giant people with ornately decorated bodies. The name comes from the name comes from *iha* "feathery" and *k'at'ek* "giant". K'at'ek are referenced in many myths and their interpretation varies between places and even families, but they are generally recognised as large humanoids who are separate entities to the [[Öb]].

The number of Ihk'at'ek is unspecified, some people consider it a single deity while others believe them to be an entire people. In fact, most [[Öb]] myths are told with vague language which can be quite freely interpreted. For example the use of *iha*, which can mean ornate, and not *ihihda*, which explicitly means feathered. Another name, *aguson dumij* "sea bringers", uses the verb root *-dum-*, which can vary between "give", "take", "receive" or "bring".
## Jailgei
Jailgei is an event or series of events in [[Öb]] mythology featuring the Ihk'at'ek, with varying interpretations, generally considered to be a universal apocalypse and beginning of a new world. It is said that the Ihk'at'ek, which may be one being or group of beings, takes the sea up onto the land thereby bringing about the end of the world.

The term *Jailgei* is the form of the term as spoken and written at the time in which [[Öb]] and [[Xiyeru]] mythologies were consolidated during the formation of the [[Lavondu]] culture in the [[7th century|7th]] to [[9th century|9th]] centuries [[Universal calendar|AGS]]. The earliest form attested in writing is *cayalgüi*, from around the [[4th century]]. This earlier form has a more transparent etymology, from *cayal* meaning "boundary" or "extremity" and *-gü* referring to the land as separate from the sea (as in *[[T'ugü]]*), thus the interpretation of Jailgei as the "end of the world" perhaps should be taken literally to mean the physical end of the ground, rather than an apocalypse.

In fact, there are some identifiable similarities between the Ihk'at'ek and Jailgei and the [[Fururūʼupwa|Xiyeru creation myth]]. The [[Xiyeru]] tell of *[[Fururūʼupwa]]*, an infinitely large being whose body is covered in [[ńaʼay|tattoos]] which depict the entirety of possible history, who is said to have created the land, the sea, and the [[Xiyeru]]. If one were to interpret Jailgei as simply being the physical boundary of the land and the sea, and the ornately decorated giant Ihk'at'ek as the architect of such a separation, then the resemblance is clear. The folklore of both the [[Öb]] and the [[Xiyeru]] also considered people to have been created out of clay by a single almighty entity, though this is unrelated to the Ihk'at'ek and could well be a coincidence.