The House of Knowledge or **Theyteče Arapa** in [[Ardanic language|Ardanic]] is both an institution and a place. In fact it is one of the most important institutions in Ardanic society. The House of Knowledge is not a single house, although it probably started as a single building housing a library and an academy. For example in the city of [[Tyeleš]] the House of Knowledge has many buildings all over the entire cities with their own libraries, belonging to the different ranks of [[Suf]] and being focussed on different matters and disciplines. Most buildings belonging to the Houses of Knowledge are either schools or libraries. The House of Knowledge usually employs many scribes to copy texts, often several times, and allocate them in different locations, as fires in individual libraries have been problems throughout their entire history. 

Individual scholars can also sort of "publish" their writings in the House of Knowledge. This is of course not comparable to a modern publication system, but in essence a scholar can submit their own writings to the House and if found worthy of it, their writings are copied and stored in the House and distributed to those interested in them. 
## House of Knowledge of Tyeleš 
The most well known and most influential house of knowledge is located in the city of [[Tyeleš]]. It is responsible for the education, training and examination, as well as ordination of all [[Suf]] - state officials, within the entire [[Tyon-Arat]], with the exception of the [[Phaš]], who are trained and examined in [[Alpa]]. Thus it is the largest of these institutions. It has several subbranches like the **Kaluy Arapa** "house of medicine" and the **Erti Arapa** "house of border-officials" and so on. The House of Knowledge of Tyeleš is also politically immensely powerful and has an almost constant presence in the [[Marte Arapa|House of Electors]] and on the political scene of the city and the entire state. Given that all disciplines of Suf are trained there and dependent on payment by the state, some have even accused the House of Knowledge to form a sort of shadow government. 
## House of Knowledge of Alpa 
The city of [[Alpa]] houses the second largest House of Knowledge. Alpa is mainly responsible for training the [[Phaš]], agricultural officials. Although these are but one discipline of Suf, they make up almost half of all state officials in actuality. Thus the House of Knowledge in Alpa isn't without its own large sphere of influence either. The documents stored in their libraries are also mainly concerned with agriculture, botany and zoology. 

## House of Knowledge of Ksuray
There are no state officials trained in the city of Ksuray, but all meetings of the [[Martu|Electors]] of the Tyon-Arat are held in the city of Ksuray, making it a politically important place. Therefore the libraries of Ksuray are filled with the protocols of countless political meetings, councils and discussions, as well as detailed descriptions of decrees and decisions made by the Martu. 
## House of Knowledge of Nra 
The town of [[Nra]] is not among three leading cities of the Tyon-Arat. After the emancipation of the outer provinces it did become a provincial capital and due to proximity to the eastern regions and the [[Kupal Sassti Psana|Kupal military province]] lead to the establishment of an independent House of Knowledge in this city. This House of Knowledge is mainly associated with the discipline of the [[Krut]], military official and records there are concerned with the amount of legible soldiers, status of garrisons and so on. 
## Lesser Houses of Knowledge
Apart from the House of Knowledge in Nra, there are a few other smaller Houses, which are usually side branches of the House of Knowledge of Tyeleš or of Alpa. Some of them have a kind of independent status, where they are usually just libraries and schools of the provincial government or run by an [[Itif]]. 
## House of Knowledge of the Fourth Homeland
Ardanian people began to settle in the [[Uhustaw]] during the [[9th century]]. In the year [[10th century|938]], the town of [[Asterin-Nem]] was founded by [[Psirin Aster]] on the behalf of the government of Tyeleš. They advised Psirin to establish a town featuring all hallmarks of Ardanic civilization and structure. This meant that it would also contain a House of Knowledge. The main building in Asterin-Nem was even more or less a copy of the main building in Tyeleš, just smaller. 
After the [[Šrašipmi]] lead to a break between the relations of the Uhustaw with the Ardanian homelands, the House of Knowledge in Asterin-Nem became an independent institution. They established side branches and a common organization with similar institution in [[Ayatma]] and [[Üskin]] and other settlements all over the Uhustaw. They began to issue their own education and ordained their own officials, in a system which was more localised and less centralised than that of Tyeleš. 
## House of Knowledge of the Ansang Isles
In the year 951/952 AGS the scholars Psirin Aster went on an expedition to the coast of [[Qnōp']] and south to [[Krobu]]. In the city of [[Ndarus]] he and his companions would be captured by [[Ansang Empire|Ansang]] soldiers and brought to the [[Ansang Islands|islands]]. After meeting the Emperor he was ordered to teach his subjects in the manner of his homeland and to spread the knowledge he claimed to have. This lead to the establishment of a similar institution of Ardanian learning on the Ansang isles. After Psirin's death, the institution was continued first by [[Thana Aster]] and later by [[Ušmin Šipisti]]. 