---
tags:
  - history
---
During [[11th century]] the [[Empire of Kalotgane]] rose to prominence as one of the largest and most aggressive polities of [[Oksandanderi]]. During the 1070s it fought a war against the state of [[Makhatganda]], which ended in a victory for Kalotgane and the dissolution of the Makhatganda. After this, the Empire of Kalotgane would come out as the sole hegemon of Oksan. 

## Prelude 
During the [[8th century]] and [[9th century]] century both the [[Makhatganda]], as well as the alliance between the cities of [[Vërev]] and [[Tarin]] rose to considerable strength and fought many wars of conquest in Oks. 
The Kingdom of Vërev and Tarin would transform into the [[League of Kalotgane]] in 843, after retaking the ancient royal capital of [[Astmerge the Great]]. From then on they fight several wars against the [[Kingdom of Erme and Vukhun]] and the remaining [[Walkenian people|Walken]] tribes. Finally in 1020 AGS, King [[Suyeray Astmergekhtim|Suyeray]] would declare himself Lord of the Lowlands and the Highlands or in other words - emperor. 
## The Siege of Pakkan 
In 1074 Suyeray Astmergekhtim set out on a campaign against the Makhatganda. It is said that his force was at least three times larger than anything the Makhat could put up. Despite the odds, the Makhat could initially repel the invasion. During the Battle of [[Pakkan]] they won against the much larger force. This victory however was a Pyrrhic victory. Essentially weather and the encroaching winter were what saved the Makhat. However essentially they were besieged now. The forces of Suyeray could hold a siege just south of Pakkan throughout the winter, while the victorious Makhat troops were trapped. The allocation of soldiers towards Pakkan also lessened control over the [[Eastern Territories of the Makhatganda|Eastern Territories]] leading to sparks of new rebellions growing stronger over the following winter. The following spring and summer of 1075 didn't lead to any further conclusions. On the other hand, now all that Suyeray had to do was holding out until the siege broke the Makhat.
## The Surrender of the Thirty
The Makhatganda was in a dangerous situation. While they could in theory defeat the invaders, doing so would have a heavy toll on them, perhaps too much to bear. With 1075 coming to a close, the [[Council of Thirty]], the government of Makhatganda, made a final decision. They surrendered. They would join the Empire of Kalotgane, simply for the sake of ensuring no further damage to their people and essentially to save themselves too. With this decision, on the year of 1076 the state of Makhatganda once again became the province of [[Erkhanda]] and part of the Empire of Kalotgane.
## Aftermath
The following situation was far from simple. While the Council of Thirty continued to rule the Erkhanda from its capital [[Vánarv]], not everyone accepted their surrender and neither their continued authority. Notably there are the so called [[Northern Government at Elghëday|Northern Government]] in the former province of Erdo and the [[Dominion at Zhürme]]. The first is former provincial government of the province of [[Erdo]]. They sought to reclaim control over the northern trade routes and bar the traitorous government in Vánarv from access. Then there is the Dominion at Zhürme which is a continuation of the former military government of the Eastern Territories aka the former [[Temakkeri]]. Both of them claim to be the legitimate government of the Makhat and are essentially government in exile now. While the Makhatganda had created a unique peace between the highland tribes and the lowlanders. The highland tribes in particular didn't take lightly to the decision of the Council. Several areas of Highland tribes immediately went up in rebellion and started even small incursions into the territory controlled by Kalotgane. 

Then there is the [[Ván-Enne Alliance]] . The threefold state of [[Tyon-Arat]] had been bolstering its defenses for quite a while in anticipation of an invasion. With the surrender and dissolution of the Makhatganda their fears were coming ever closer. The military governor [[Kselin Etta]] quickly forged an alliance with some of the Highlander tribes close to their border. The so called _Ván-enne_ "Mountain people" alliance was born. In the coming years they began to support several rebellious highland factions in an effort to undermine the central control of Kalotgane. They also tried to get diplomatically closer towards the Northern Government in an attempt at legitimizing it, but more importantly to ensure its survival, since the Northern Government only controlled a fraction of the former Makhatganda and this fraction was rather poor and mountainous and only supported through the northern trade.