---
tags:
  - history
---
The Šrašipmi was an internal conflict within the [[Uhustaw]], which ended in a coup d'etat against [[Esre Aster]] and the foundation of the [[Grand Council of Uhustaw|Grand Council]] and the [[Ternary System]]. 

## Background
The city of [[Asterin-Nem]] was founded by [[Psirin Aster]] and his [[Itif]] in the year [[10th century|938 AGS]]. During the early years, the city grew rapidly from a small settlement into a town approaching several thousand inhabitants. It would soon be the largest settlement in the entire [[Uhustaw]]. Psirin departed on his last journey in 951, the settlemed would be governed for a short while by [[Ksate Aster]], until [[Ayuf Aster]] returned in 953. Ayuf largely continued the policies of Psirin, but with a more consistent strictness regarding the governorship of the settlements. The governor of each settlement was a [[Kele]], who was elected by one of the three cities [[Alpa]], [[Tyeleš]] or [[Ksuray]] and this legitimized in their office. Each town would have a [[Marte Arapa|House of Electors]], representing the larger populace, but ultimately the Kele had the responsibility of managing all foreign affairs of a settlement, as well as bringing in immigrants and buying properties for new settlements, as well as distributing new settlers into these new areas. This lead to settlements being almost overwhelmingly ruled by one [[Itif]] alone. This situation lead to a small argument between [[Hasif Aster]] and Ayuf during the 960s, with her rejecting to work under Ayuf and instead focusing her energy on the settlement of [[Ayatma]]. In the long run most settlements remained independent of each other and while Asterin-Nem became something akin to a capital, it would rule over the other settlements with a legitimate governor. 

[[Esre Aster]] was born in the Uhustaw and grew up there. He became a member of the [[Aster Itif]] at a young age and was subsequently fostered by Ayuf himself. Esre was a great friend of the [[Nambāno]] people and promoted the relations between the Ardanic settlements and the Nambāno settlements. Though he also the continued Ayuf's tendency of more authoritarian governorship. As long as Ayuf lived he was defended by his old mentor. 

## The Conflict
### 1015 - The Death of Ayuf
Esre was the de-factor governor under the protection of Ayuf for many years already when Ayuf passed away in the year [[11th century|1015]] AGS. During these years Ayuf more or less shielded him from criticism. Though the fact that Esre was directly appointed by Ayuf, without the democratic consent of the [[Martu|Marte]] of the city made many people very unhappy. This process boiled over eventually and many factions opposing Esre organized among the citizens. 

### Third Month of 1018/807
A faction opposing Esre had formed among the Electors of Asterin-Nem, numbering around 38 people. Their demand was that Esre should leave Asterin-Nem, go to [[Tyeleš]] and be reaffirmed in his position as [[Kele]] by the [[Martu|Electors]] of that city. Two groups should be send to Tyeleš. One belonging to Esre and another with an emissary who would carry a detailed list of accusations against Esre. These accusations would be read out to the Electors of Tyeleš, for them to decide upon the case fairly. 
The sentiment around Esre was fairly mixed. Many generally opposed him and demanded that the Electors of the city should elect their own governor. Others completely oppose Esre or the position of governors entirely and demanded a completely new system to be installed. 

### 10.01.808 
On the tenth day of the first month of the year [[Ardanic calendar|808]] or [[11th century|1019]] news spread that Esre had returned to Uhustaw. In his hands a document reaffirming his position as kele and thus governor of Asterin-Nem. The electors of Tyeleš did not condemn him based on the accusations put up against him. 
### 16.01.808
During a meeting of the Electors of Asterin-Nem, a group of radical opponents stormed the [[Marte Arapa|House of Electors]] and held the Electors hostage for several hours. They demanded that the Electors should under no circumstances allow Esre to return to power. The Electors gave in to their demands and it was decided to install an interrim government consisting of three Kele, who would rule over the city as transition, until further matters were cleared up. Among the three was also [[Čatra Aster]], daughter of Ayuf. Though it was not clear whether the three Kele actually held any power, as for the moment said radical faction was still pulling the strings. 
### 28.01.808 (The Day of Regret) 
In the morning of the 28th day of *Akul Turak* (First 64 day month) Esre arrived at the outskirts of Asterin and was barred entrance by several armed guards. It was unclear on whose command these guards were acting, but they had received orders by the new transitional government. Esre did not know this. During the next few hours Esre was held off and demanded entry, while the news of his arrival spread in the city and stirred up the populace. Both supporters and opponents were on the streets, hotly debating the matter at hand. It is not known when and where the fights actually started, but soon the sentiment boiled over and people became violent. Allegedly Esre also lost his temper and ordered his entourage to force their way into the city. During these events several people lost their lives. Esre arrived at the House of Electors and violently took it back from the radicals. In a somber moment the violence stopped and people came to their senses. Esre made a public speech, taking personal responsibility for the violence and promising swift changes. The three elected Kele were made co-rulers of Esre, although it was clear that he had assumed full authority again and just abstained from punishing them for cooperating with the rebells.  
### 29.01.808 - 36.01.808 
News of the violence in Asterin-Nem reached the other cities and towns and caused a wave of disturbance and worry in the entire Uhustaw. The nearby cities of [[Ayatma]] and [[Sas-Nem]] readied their defenses and dispatched an envoy to Asterin-Nem. On the morning of the 32nd of *Akul Turak* a force of 500 soldiers arrived at Asterin-Nem, demanding immediate restoration of order. It should be said that Ayatma in particular was always more critical of Esre, and the Electors and governor of Ayatma acted in the belief that the violence was incited by Esre himself. Esre would immediately put up a curfew and declined to talk with the emissaries from Ayatma and Sas-Nem. Instead he just demanded that they should immediately return home. In his mind they had sided with the rebells against him anyway and were threatening to put up a siege.  
### 36.01.808 
Seeing that the soldiers from Ayatma and Sas-Nem were in front of their city and their governor was not reacting much at all, the people of Asterin-Nem became increasingly distraught. During the night from the 36th to the 37th of *Akul Turak* a group of opponents infiltrated Esre's manor and took him hostage in his own home. On the following morning they came out and made a declaration that Esre would abdicate from any position he held or claimed to hold. Instead authority would once again be given to the three elected Kele and the electors of the city alone. They forced Esre the sign an official declaration of resignation. The three Kele would then meet the emissaries from Sas-Nem and Ayatma outside the city and surrender immediately. The soldiers from the two other cities entered the city without any violent disturbances. 

Furthermore Esre was also tasked, as part of his resignation, to write letters to all allied Nambāno and [[Nespe]] lords, declaring that he was under no circumstances demanding any intervention from them, that the while incident was a wholly internal affair and that peace was restored. Additionally to this, these letters also contained an explicit invitation to a grand council of all dignitaries within the Uhustaw. This was to strengthen their alliance and build upon it for the future. 

## Aftermath
### 40.02.808
After resolving all grievances of the past month, Esre was released from his house arrest and send to [[Tyeleš]] into exile. In Tyeleš some people would gather arround him and demand a military expedition to be send to the Uhustaw to restore their authority. Esre rejected such offers. Not just because he didn't want to, but also because he couldn't. In Tyeleš he was soon pushed out of the political spotlight and the [[Renewal and Emancipation faction]] outnumbered his supporters by far. Soon the Tyon-Arat had to deal with more important matters at home, thus shifting their attention away from the Uhustaw. The relationship between the Tyon-Arat and the Uhustaw was soured and would not be restored fully to an equal and friendly relationship until over a century later. There would be no official expeditions sending immigrants from the Tyon-Arat to the Uhustaw anymore, though migration of private individuals continued nonetheless. 
### 01.00.809 
On the first day of the *Turakmen Sustura* "monthless time" the first [[Grand Council of Uhustaw|Grand Council]] came together. This council consisted of elected members of all Ardanic communities, of most Nespe communities and many Nambāno dignitaries as well. This council would eventually lead to the [[Ternary System]] and the formation of the Uhustaw as a unified state entity. 





