*xal* /xɑl/ was a [[Rantag]] word that was the closest equivalent to the English word "holy". However, the word had a wider range of meanings. Inititially, the word meant "set apart".
## Etymology

*xal* was from the archaic Rantag verb *xaly*, which meant "to separate", "to set apart". This verb corresponded to the standard (Totky) Rantag *xaloty* with the same meaning, formed from the former using the suffix -ot, originally a frequentative ending. While *xaly* was rarely if ever used in standard Rantag, *xal* remained a common word with a specialized sense, distinct from the derivatives of *xaloty*.
## Development
#### Early Ran practice

The original meaning of *xal* is best understood by ancient Ran ritual practices. When eating, drinking, or more generally benefitting from something, it was common to set apart a part of it as a gift to a god. For example, a family eating bread might have separated a piece with the intent to later deliver the piece to the sea as a gift to Pilur. Gifts like these were thought to please the gods and bring prosperity. 

Such a piece of bread, after being separated, would've been considered xal, "set apart". Even before the delivery of the piece, restrictions would have applied to the behaviour that could be shown towards it. For example, holding it with dirty hands or damaging it would've been against cultural mores. Eating the piece would have been scandalous, probably leading to harsh punishment of some sort.

It is possible that the prohibition originated from not wishing to make displeasing what was to be later given to the gods. Later on, in any case, the ownership of a xal thing was considered to already transfer to the gods the moment it was set apart, even when it was not physically given to them yet. From such a perspective, the prohibitions were rules against damaging the property of gods. Though it is unlikely this view was the original, requiring rather developed views of property, the invention must've still been early, being common in sources of the times.
### Expansion

The idea of being xal was increasingly expanded beyond the original ritual context starting around 4th century BGS. This might have been driven by the development
### Philosophy: Are the gods xal?

The gradual development of the concept is seen in the religious debate around gods being xal. While this debate was mostly restricted to the Feculky of the early first century AGS, the winning position would spread all around Pilam. One side had a narrower view of xal, viewing sacrificial offerings to gods as xal (this was common to both sides), but not considering the gods themselves as xal. According polemicists, those disagreeing with this view dishonored the gods by likening them to the earthly objects given to them (or taken by them). The other side used xal in a wider sense, where it corresponded more generally to divinity and holiness. The polemicists of this side considered the first side to be guilty of pedantry and of dishonoring the gods, this time by likening them to profane things. 

The first side was more likely to be the original, as all known descriptions of the gods as xal postdate the Great Syzygy, and as this understanding of xal seems closer to its ritual roots. Nonetheless the latter side would eventually prevail. Denying that the gods were xal was eventually made illegal in the late first century, though the debate was already over at this point. While it is unclear why this view won out, it is probably related to emergence of more secular kinds of philosophy in Feculky and the numerous political changes taking place. The old view was instead associated with fanatical rural totyq and the old establishment, two forces that were falling out of favor. An influential piece of text from this time, written by a young tot of Fecul, polemically discusses the controversy from the latter perspective.

> Woe to the pedants and the prideful, woe to those with disdain for rationality. Hear, who must hear: let not them nor anyone else deceive you that the gods are not xal. For the gods are xal, and this I will show in three ways. First, anything is either xal or not xal. That which is not xal we call profane; but the gods are not profane, so they are xal. Second, when the foolish reply that xal only means something we have separated (*xaloty*), they are wrong. For when we separate the harvest to give to the king in taxes, we do not call that xal. We call things xal when they are separated and given to the gods. Indeed, it is not that the gods are xal because we have separated them, but that the things we separate are xal if we give them to the gods, because the gods are xal. For what could be more separate from the profane than the gods!
> 
> But because some still refuse to see, I will give a third argument, which convinced even my stubborn friend. Everyone knows the things we give to the gods are not in vain. When we give them food, they do not merely keep it, but eat it. Thus their bodies must be xal, as it is wrong for something profane to consume something xal. In fact, if someone profane here is sustained by something xal, their body becomes xal and we sacrifice them to the gods to give what we owe. Truly, what the gods own is xal, and what can one own more than their body? When thieves come, they take even the clothes, yet seldom the heart. So, the bodies of the gods are xal. Likewise, when totyq hide from the world and sing their xal songs to the gods, this means the minds of the gods are xal. But how can something consist entirely of what is xal and not be xal itself? Even a child can understand this, but the pedants can't. Woe to those who hear this and still deny!
> 
> They are blind; they do not see. At the beach, they ask "where is the sand (*xinyca*, collective)", for they note only the grains of sand (*xinyq*, plural). Like an old man has hairs (*kawuq*) but not hair (*kawuca*, collective), they have, in their age, rejected the gods. For the gods stand in front of them, but they close their eyes, and thus become blind. The wise instead pray:
> 
> O (*exe*) Fecul and Pilur, who have always been xal, are xal, and will always be xal - help me see the truth and guard me from blindless. Today I take these fruit and divide (*xaloty*) them: profane fruit for the profane people, xal fruit for the xal gods. Like for like: profane for profane and xal for xal. And as I have given, I trust you give. O (*exe*) Fecul and Pilur, who have helped me see the truth and guarded me from blindless - I praise you!

"The Blind" and "the Wise" would come to be the standard titles for the sides of the debate in Feculky. The prayer given would also become well known as "The Prayer of the Wise", widely quoted for centuries and addressed to countless different gods.
###