The **Exodus period** ([[Möxali]] *eginja nayam*) was the third canonical period of [[Nejinayon]], lasting from 655 to 861 [[Universal calendar|AGS]]. This period follows the [[Horizon period]] and precedes the [[Thousand Rivers period]]. It was a transitional period of T'ugü's history characterised by large-scale population movement and societal restructuring. 
# History
## The Great Sickness (655 AGS)
The [[Horizon period|Horizon period's]] population explosion in [[Udovuʼo]] and centuries of trade with [[T'ugü]] eventually led to disaster, a mysterious and widespread disease in 655 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] which came to be known as *Āzamatwa* (the great sickness).
## The Great Hunger (656 - 664 AGS)
Āzamatwa reversed the population growth and disrupted the trade pipeline on which the [[Xiyeru]] had become dependent, resulting in a famine lasting 656 - 664 [[Universal calendar|AGS]], known as *Āguwo* (the great hunger).

During the famine, the incumbent [[Āeruweʼa]] refused aid from [[T'ugü]], believing the [[Öb]] to be the source of the plague (perhaps rightly). This greatly extended the famine, but probably prevented the complete loss of the [[Xiyeru]] culture. For perhaps the first time in history, people began to lose faith in the [[Āeruweʼa]], forming a great cultural rift which would never fully heal. One key result of this was the [[Āeruweʼa]] losing much of her political influence and each of the [[Udovuʼo|five islands]] becoming politically autonomous, with [[Āʼiyoru|governors]] (until then a mostly ceremonial role) taking on many important responsibilities.

The five island governors were called *[[Āʼiyoru]]* (or *Aʼiolu* in [[Ahōtoli]]), an augmentative form of the [[Xiri]] word *ʼiyoru*, which literally means "instructor" or "commander" and refers to anyone who heads a group of subordinates. The term *yoboru* was also used to refer to a person holding a political office. The role of the [[Āʼiyoru]] was to maintain the trade economy and diplomatic relations with the other islands.
## The Great Departure (c. 660 - 700/701 AGS)
Against the advice of the [[Āeruweʼa]], a significant proportion of the population fled to [[T'ugü]], seeking refuge in the [[Rhavo todo]], temporary [[Xiyeru]] colonies established along the northern coast in the last two centuries. The [[Rhavo todo]] soon became large permanent settlements. This migration continued well after the famine and up to the end of the [[7th century]]. This was known as *Āega* (the great departure), which gives the Exodus period its name, *eginja nayam* "period of departure" in [[Möxali]].

The [[Āʼiyoru|five governors of Udovuʼo]] met in 690 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] to discuss what to do about the [[Xiyeru]] population in [[T'ugü]]. [[Udovuʼo]] was still very much in the wake of the famine, and as such it was decided that their focus should be on their respective islands and peoples, but that the expatriates should not be abandoned. It was suggested that a sixth governor could be appointed to oversee the [[Rhavo todo]], but the maritime infrastructure had collapsed and could not support frequent contact between the islands and the continent. As such, nothing in particular was done, and the [[Xiyeru]] population in [[T'ugü]] was left to culturally diverge with little direct political influence from [[Udovuʼo]].

The settlement of the [[Xiyeru]] in [[Rhavo todo]] drove out most of the [[High Alöbi]]-speaking semi-nomadic [[Yaxeb]] people who had began diffusing into the north-eastern hills in the [[Horizon period]]. The migration was accelerated by the popularisation of sailing, which allowed families to hop along the coast until they found somewhere to permanently settle. The [[Yaxeb]] continued to settle along the northern coast of the continent throughout the Exodus period, with the furthest settlements ~1000km east of [[T'ugü]]. These migrations also unexpectedly encountered extant [[öboid]] peoples who spoke entirely unknown languages, ate wild [[cimcim]] but did not cultivate it, and had a darker natural skin tone than the [[Öb]] of [[T'ugü]]. Little is known about these original peoples as they were quickly assimilated into the [[Yaxeb]], though many elements of their languages and cultural practices remained.
## Azodo government and birth of the Lavondu (700/701 - 861 AGS)
On the southern island, [[Azodo]], influential political figures headed by the [[Āʼiyoru]] took the new power vacuum as an opportunity to install many new offices, systems and regulations. The [[Azodo Government]] was the first structured government in [[Udovuʼo]], but was not particularly democratic and did not much serve the general populace, with many of the new systems approaching straight up bureaucracy. Nonetheless, the historically isolationist [[Azodo]] subsequently gained more cultural influence throughout the other islands, with its divergent dialect [[Ahōtoli]] becoming the most spoken language in [[Udovuʼo]] by 800 [[Universal calendar|AGS]], at least among the societal classes who appear in recorded history.

By the end of the period, [[Udovuʼo]] had finally returned to its pre-famine population of around 100,000 and the population of [[T'ugü]] had exceeded one million, with around 6% being [[Xiyeru]]-descended people known broadly as *[[Lavondu]]* "foreign/distant people". The [[Lavondu]] continued to practise a variant of the [[Xiyeru]] religion and would still frequently visit [[Udovuʼo]], though they now considered *[[Lavdo]]*, a region of [[T'ugü]], their home. Until around 800 [[Universal calendar|AGS]], the [[Lavondu]] would regularly pay tribute to the [[Āeruweʼa]] and each of the [[Āʼiyoru|five island governors]] of [[Udovuʼo]] by presenting them with valuables and general goods from [[T'ugü]]. This was called *gulon* "apology/compassion" and originates from the practice of sending aid to [[Udovuʼo]] after the famine, and as a way of apologising for the disregard for the [[Āeruweʼa|Āeruweʼa's]] wisdom shown by their ancestors. The founders of the new culture are said to have taken on the name *[[Lavondu]]* themselves as they believed they could no longer be considered [[Xiyeru]] "true people", but this humility should not be confused with a lack of self respect and in fact was considered an expression of their dignity as a separate people.

At the end of the Exodus period, a [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|sixth governor]] was finally installed in [[Rhavo todo]], where she took to organising the greatest scholars and statesmen among the [[Lavondu]] to undertake a vast project to restructure society in [[T'ugü]] called *[[Tuvöblin]]*.
# Languages
During this period, The [[Low Alöbi|Alöbi]]-[[Xiri]] mixed language [[Möxali]] developed, replacing [[Xiri]] as the language of the [[Lavondu]]. In [[Udovuʼo]], [[Xiri]] remained a lesser dialect with the prestige dialect [[Ahōtoli]] becoming the new lingua franca. [[Möxali]] became the primary language of [[Nejinayon]], since it was a more useful language for the purpose of preservation and accessibility of information. The [[Ugugo]] writing system and what was standard [[Xiri]] c. 600 [[Universal calendar|AGS]] were also preserved as a liturgical language in some particular texts and religious practices. [[High Alöbi|High]] and [[Low Alöbi]] independently underwent separate vowel shifts, meaning they were now completely separated linguistically and geographically.