---
tags:
  - history
---
The **Horizon period** ([[Möxali]] *vonjalca nayam*) was the second canonical period of [[Nejinayon]], lasting from 67 to 655 AGS. This period follows the [[Sunrise period]] and precedes the [[Exodus period]].
# History
Increasing [[Xiyeru]] population towards the end of the Sunrise period led to expansion in search of resources and eventually to the discovery of [[T'ugü]] and the [[Öb]], which marks the beginning of the Horizon period. The import of a diverse range of food from [[T'ugü]] allowed the population of [[Udovuʼo]] to grow more rapidly, and a trade-based economy to emerge in [[T'ugü]]. Historical records from this period describe a technological revolution with the development of specialised writing ink, paper, the backstrap loom and subsequent more advanced ships, and various other technologies.
## The Ihk'at'ek myth
All [[Öb]] quite unanimously associated the [[Xiyeru]] with the [[Öb mythology#Ihk'at'ek|Ihk'at'ek myth]], since they fit the description of ornately decorated giants quite well, but they certainly didn't seem sinister in their intentions, nor did they wield the power to cause the great destruction some people had foretold. The favoured interpretation of [[Öb mythology#Jailgei|Jailgei]], the mythic end and rebirth of the world, was that the arrival of the [[Xiyeru]] and the implied existence of a world outside [[T'ugü]] represented a crossing over point, from a previous world of adequate monotony to one of diversity and discovery. The bringing forth of the sea onto the land was accordingly understood to mean the gift of sailing, the sea and the land need no longer be separate realms.
## Rhavo todo
In the last couple of centuries of the Horizon period, permanent [[Xiyeru]] settlements known as *[[Rhavo todo]]* were established along the northern coast of [[T'ugü]]. These settlements served as a home away from home for those staying in [[T'ugü]] for extended periods of time, allowing them to spend time with other [[Xiyeru]] and practise their culture together. These people were typically traders, explorers, diplomats, and natural philosophers, some of whom spent much of their life in [[T'ugü]] before returning home to [[Udovuʼo]] to raise children and grow old. Many [[Öb]] in coastal communities near [[Rhavo todo]] moved away from farming [[cimcim]] in favour of a broader array of food which made for better trade with [[Xiyeru]].

The [[Rhavo todo]] were established on land which the migratory highlands [[Öb]] had previously occupied each dry season. This forced many families to adopt a fully nomadic lifestyle which [[T'ugü]] was not really big enough to support sustainably, and so people begun to diffuse further into the hills in the north. These [[Öb]] had very little contact with the [[Xiyeru]], most had never even met them. They were generally not so playfully optimistic in their interpretation of [[Öb mythology#Jailgei|Jailgei]] and naturally distrusted the [[Xiyeru]].
# Languages
The individual languages of this period are much the same as the last, each with their own minor developments. [[High Alöbi]], however, had diverged far enough from [[Low Alöbi]] to only be mutually intelligible to those who are very familiar with the other. [[Ugugo]] writing was introduced to [[T'ugü]] at the beginning of the period and subsequently evolved and diversified into many regional variants, most of which were still legible to any seasoned scribe by the end of the period.