The Threefold-State is the homeland is the largest state of the [[Ardanic people]] for most of their history. It is located within southwestern [[Oksandanderi]]. It was formed by a union of the three cities of [[Alpa]], [[Tyeleš]] and [[Ksuray]] during the [[3rd century]]. The lifestyle and economy of the Threefold-State is dominated by the great lake [[Uskay]] and the [[Fsikay]] and [[Očew]] rivers. 

## History 

### Origins 
The traditional date of the founding of the Threefold-State is the year 211 AGS. This date is of course not undisputed and many point at the history between the three cities beforehand. In fact the Tyon-Arat is more or less just the culmination of a previous development between the three cities to form temporary alliances against foreign threats. In particular the conquests of [[Astmerge the Great]], which occured during the late [[2nd century]]. Ironically the year of the foundation of the Tyon-Arat is just one year after the death of Astmerge. It can be said that during the first century or so of its existence, the union was fairly loose and limited to a regular diplomatic exchange, a common assembly of [[Martu]] and of course military aid. However over the course of time, the three cities would grow together and form a unique division of responsibilities and political roles. For one [[Tyeleš]] became the center of most education and the paramount of the esteemed Ardanic [[Suf|system of state bureaucrats and scholars]]. Alpa became paramount in all things agricultural and important developments in the [[Ardanic irrigation system]] were developed there. These innovations lead to a population boom in the coming centuries. Lastly Ksuray was the city of unity, where delegates of all cities met to discuss matters concerning all. 

## Political System
### Government
The [[Ardanian government]] is unique among the governments of Oks. although not as much in the wider world. It represents a republican system, which lacks the dynasticism and hereditary nobility seen elsewhere in Oks. 
Leaders are elected by a system, which can be described as *consent democracy*, in which candidates are publically elected, but not in competition to each other. Instead candidates must receive a minimum among of votes, which signals public approval. 

The government itself consists of three important positions, the [[Martu]], the [[Kele]] and the [[Stera]]. The Martu are directly elected by the citizens of each city. They meet in the [[Marte Arapa|House of Electors]], where they decide upon matters of state. They do not have any power beyond that. To actually undertake measures, they appoint a Kele. A Kele is like a minister who is given temporary power to solve an issue or institute a policy. They cannot chose what to do and are in fact more like employees of the Marte. If a Kele has served several successful terms, they are given the status of Stera. A Stera is a senior member of the council and forms a counterweight to the Marte. The Stera have veto powers against decisions of the Marte. 
