The Ardanic people are an ethnicity living in the southwestern parts of [[Oksandanderi]], called the [[Ardanic Basin]]. The Ardanic basin is dominated by the great lake [[Uskay]] and the [[Fsikay]] river, as well as the smaller, but no less important [[Očew]] river. Most Ardanic people live within the [[Tyon-Arat]], the Threefold State. Some other Ardanic people live outside that state and are known as the [[Murfa people]]. During the [[10th century]] many Ardanians migrated westward and founded settlements in the [[Uhustaw]], eventually yielding another ethnicity on their own. Sometimes Ardanics are differentiated from [[Ardanian people|Ardanians]]. The latter being only the people of Tyon-Arat, while the former are all people speaking an Ardanic language. The two terms are largely synonymous though. 
## Language
Ardanic people are characterised by speaking an [[Ardanic language]]. The Ardanic languages aren't a single language, but a family. The most useful way to divide this family is by sorting them into *core* and *periphery* members. All the core members are spoken within the Ardanic basin itself, while peripherical members are not. The most notable language of the core is [[Classical Ardanic]]. Among the peripherical languages are *Transfsikay* and the [[Murfa language]], as well as the *Očew dialect*, which is transitional between core and periphery. 
## Culture 
The Ardanic people are distinct in several matters from other people of Oks. Their culture is generally more egalitarian and largely republican in nature. Dynasties and clans are generally shallow and don't have much importance to them. Instead the institution of the [[Itif]] is regarded as the most important social unit in Ardanic society. Another constant of Ardanic society is the tradition of the [[Wayač]]. 

Apart from the itif, there is the rank/position of the [[Suf]], the Ardanic state official. The Suf is the idealised citizen in some way or rather the educated member of society who pursues a political career for the betterment of their peers. Over time the Ardanians have developed a sophisticated system of [[Ardanian government|governance]], where officials and bureaucrats of many different sorts play a pivotal role. 
### Public Sobriety
The Ardanic people hold what they call "public sobriety", which is a certain dignity, which a virtuous and well adjusted citizen and member is expected to possess. This sort of sobriety demands that public outbursts of emotions are to be avoided, that others are to be treated in a respectful and egalitarian manner. As such it more or less dictates people to ignore differences in gender, ethnicity or religion for the sake of civility. In public people ought to dress modest and take care of their exterior. Most men and many women shave their heads, it is even regarded as a hallmark of the scholar and the [[Suf]] to have either a shaved or well trimmed head. At the same is long hair associated with virility and soldiers. Scholars and state officials in general are expected to foremost carry their public face and identity foremost with their profession. Sexism and nepotism are looked down upon, at least publically. 
### Anti-Dynasticism/Monarchism 
Ardanic society places a large value on democratic decisions and puts the overall community of common interests above communities such as family and dynasty. As such they largely despise nepotism, at least among relatives. They are not without their own faults and certain [[Itif]] have always been more powerful than others and gained unfair advantage for their members and friends. Though it should be said that such scandals also lead to public outcries and it is not beneath the Ardanians, to dispose of corrupt public officials or exile unfavorable leaders. There is a certain desire for public control of leaders. In recorded Ardanic history there have been no kings, but there is an apocryphical story about the alleged king of [[Alpa]]. An influential man who became a warlord in a time long before the [[Tyon-Arat]] came to be. He'd regularly go on campaign and amass great wealth. In this time there was no democratic process and while the leader was chosen, there were no term limits or the likes. Simply the most charismatic and successful person could become a leader. Yet after seeing the rise of the [[Kort|Korthat]] military leaders among the [[Yarlish people]] he aspired to a similar position. Yet after announcing his reign, the people demanded his immediate abdication from power. One day he would walk through the city, when an angry mob approached him and tore him apart. His remains were displayed for several days on the public square. Since then nobody would approach a status similar to a monarch ever again. 
People in similar powerful offices, like leaders of itif have also been often threatened by the public and forced to step down if they became too authoritarian. 
## Society

## Religion 
The core of the Ardanic religion is similar to other [[Traditional Oksandanderian faith|traditional religions of Oksandanderi]]. The Ardanic people have a particular reverance for sources of water, rivers, lakes and springs. They believe that the waters of certain springs have powerful properties, such as healing or good fortune. Thus there are rituals where people take baths in them before important events. It is also recommended that sick people may drink for some to find healing or that pregnant women bath in them to bless the child. Before engaging in a battle, it is also custom for soldiers to ritually cleanse themselves. 

The different roles of the Ardanic official also receive ritual veneration similar to ancestor worship in other cultures. For this matter, ancestral bureaucrats are held up as idols or role models for students and teachers alike. Many Itif do have shrines dedicated to important members, which are paid respect to, if not outright venerated as well. 

Lastly there is the [[Wayač]], a particular religious ritual, which is a close kept open secret of Ardanic society. During the Wayač normal conventions of society are superceded by a different ritual order. In this order there is a king of the Wayač who leads the great dance, which is a religious performance. Members of the Wayač incorporate different roles of divine beings or divine people and play out or replay or reinterpret mythical narratives. In this sense the Wayač is both ancient and modern and a contradiction in itself. In a society which praises sobriety, somberness and civility, as well as egality, the Wayač is an exception. This apparent contradiction gives it its mystery and power. During the Wayač people wear masks and costumes concealing their identity, although it is commonly known who partakes, it is kept secret as everyone assumes a different role for the ritual. 
