The Yarlish people live in central [[Oksandanderi]] along the [[Yarla]] river. As a whole the Yarlish people fall into two or more groups. The [[Yarlish Lowlanders]] make up the largest group, while the Highlanders aka [[Ván-Enne]] make up a minority. Apart from these two, there are subgroups like the [[Makhat]], who are of mixed heritage and arose from the decline of the [[Astmergian Empire]]. 

## Language
The Yarlish people are characterised by speaking [[Yarlish languages]]. The overall family is split into several subbranches. The highest split is between the [[Vándurn]] or Highland languages and everything else. The rest is split into [[Ermean-Kuperian language|Ermean-Kuperian]] and [[Central Yarlish]]. Both feature a long written record. During the [[6th century BGS]] the kings of [[Kingdom of Erme and Vukhun|Erme and Vukhun]] were the first to write down their own histories. Later though the center of Yarlish literacy shifted to speakers of Central Yarlish, thus a language called [[Kathurn language|Kathurn]] developed in the [[3rd century BGS]]. During the [[Astmergian Empire]] Central Yarlish dispersed further and met its old relatives in the Highlands. From this meeting a new language formed, [[Makhatdurn]]. 

## Culture
The Yarlish people have a diverse set of cultural traditions based on their respective environment. As such Highlanders and Lowlanders are fairly distinct in most regards. Their [[Traditional Oksandanderian faith|traditional religious believes]] are based on the veneration of particular places in nature and the belief in spirits, which inhabit such places. These spirits follow their own law and customs and people who enter such places have to pay reverance to their powers. Priests have traditionally acted as mediators between humans and spirits and made sacrifices in special places. 

This belief in spirits goes hand in hand with the belief in ritual purity. People in Oks. believe that your deeds, thoughts and words have a distinct effect on the environment and the spirits within it. Everything leaves a trace, a sort of pollution. The body can be washed clean of corporeal pollution, but the mind must be cleansed through rituals as well. As such one cannot have bad thoughts when entering the domain of a spirit or else they might anger them. Ritual spaces have to be cleansed in particular rituals as well. When the Yarlish people began to live in ever larger settlements, it became the task of priests to create such places for religious ceremonies. A lot of these religious laws and customs can be subsumed under the term [[Kas]]. Kas translated to "law", but has a deep religious connotation. For one it is customary law, but also the natural law. People who live in tribal communities are also believed to live under the Kas, as they are thought of to live by the natural rules, while the life in the city is somewhat artificial and divorced from the holy places of the forests, mountains and steppes. 

The cultural history of the Lowlanders is also permeated by histories of conquerors and founders. Lowlanders society is definitely martial and patriarchical. Most political leaders are kings. People who arose to prominence during early history are largely conquerors. Familial bonds are important, but so are bonds beyond that. In terms of dynasticism the Yarlish people are generally a middle ground between the clan-based society of the [[Walkenian people]] and the adynastic largely egalitarian culture of the [[Ardanic people]]. As such, there has always been a divide in Lowland Yarlish society between the adynastic priesthood and the dynastic nobility. 