The **Ħautar invasion** (847 - 850 [[Universal calendar|AGS]]) was a military effort to invade and dismantle the [[Telehe Empire]] by the alliance of the [[New Kingdom of Dâmer-ṭegik]], the [[Khumnuk Union]] and the city of [[Xutuiar Uṣûnur]].
# Background
The Ħautar invasion was the final chapter in the centuries-long [[Telehe-Ħautar Conflict]], in which the [[Ħautar delûr]] fought for their independence from the tyrannical [[Telehe Empire]] in response to the gradual loss of their rights and freedoms. The key events leading directly to the invasion were the formation of the [[Khumnuk Union]], the [[839 Telehe Expedition]] and the subsequent [[Xutuiar Crisis]].

Days after the [[Xutuiar Crisis]] had ended with the formation of the [[Degâmun Guard]], the [[ârcacak]] of [[Xutuiar Uṣûnur]] met with their counterparts in the [[New Kingdom of Dâmer-ṭegik]] in an elaborate ceremony. There, it was decided that they would ally in secret against the [[Telehe Empire]] and lend support to the [[Khumnuk Union]] to this end, on the condition that they would each retain their full autonomy. Just a few years prior, it would have seemed unthinkable that [[Khumnuk Union|the union]] should be at the forefront of an upcoming war with the [[Telehe Empire]], yet in a way this was the only possible way forward. As per the terms of [[Khumnuk Union|the union]], its constituent city-states could not be brought under the command of a separate power, and any militaries certainly couldn't be sold off to the next state over, so the only way to bring together (almost) the entire [[Ħautar delûr|Ħautaric]] world under one banner was exactly this arrangement.
# Invasion
After 5 years of rallying together every last *[[ftaki]]*-sword in almost every corner of the land, a massive patchwork army, one of the largest in [[Kóty's|Kóty]] history, was assembled at [[Xutuiar Uṣûnur]] in 847, and the [[Ħautar delûr]] were briefly united. For three years, they fought their way through the [[Kóty heartlands|heartlands]], acquiring enough defectors along the way that the [[Degâmun Guard]] ended up a sizable proportion of the infantry by the time they reached the imperial capital of **[[Bērzun]]** in 850. After a 15-day battle, the [[Ħautar delûr|Ħautaric]] invaders prevailed, and the city was sacked and razed. The execution of [[Maynda Oferay]] in the massive public square which lay before the ruined imperial palace is said to have been attended by a crowd ten-thousand strong.