#meta 
**Winter** is the fifth [[Solar system#Planets|planet]] from the [[sun]] and the only astronomical object known to harbor life.
# Orbital characteristics
| Quantity                | Value              |
| ----------------------- | ------------------ |
| Apoapsis                | 1.135461 × 10¹¹ m  |
| Periapsis               | 1.003908 × 10¹¹ m  |
| Semi-major axis         | 1.069685 × 10¹¹ m  |
| Eccentricity            | 0.0614918          |
| Sidereal orbital period | 251.801611945 days |
| Argument of periapsis   | 299.357°           |
## Length of the year
Winter's year is 251.801611945 days long, which many calendar systems approximate as 250, 251 or 252 days.
## Resonance with other planets
Winter orbits the [[sun]] in an [[Solar system#Orbital resonance|orbital resonance]] with the three inner planets of the [[Solar system]], [[Pharon]], [[Scoria]] and [[Rubroplano]], driven by the strong gravitational effect of [[Pharon]] on the other planets.
# Physical characteristics
| Quantity                 | Value                           |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------------- |
| Equatorial radius        | 19,099 km                       |
| Equatorial circumference | 120,000 km                      |
| Mass                     | 5.38264 × 10²⁵ kg               |
| Mean density             | 1,844.5 kg/m³                   |
| Surface gravity          | 9.80665 m/s²                    |
| Sidereal rotation period | 86,058.230s (23h 54m 18s 230ms) |
| Synodic rotation period  | 86,400s (24h)                   |
| Axial tilt               | 9.1306349°                      |
## Surface
Winter has large ice caps; the sun has carved a habitable zone into the equatorial ~⅓ of the planet's latitudes (roughly 30°N to 30°S). This makes the total habitable area around half of its total surface area. Most of the equatorial band is covered by ocean. Despite its large size, Winter does not have any supercontinents; the largest landmasses are around 5,000km across.

The planet experiences very mild seasonal temperature variation from its axial tilt, around 9.13°, but most of the annual weather patterns come from indirect effects like melting glaciers, monsoons and convection-driven phenomena. In general, the [[sun]] tends to cause the water at the equator of the planet to evaporate, which is swept by trade winds to the ice sheets, where it condenses and causes endless rain. Winter is relatively geologically stable, though earthquakes are somewhat more common than a usual rocky world due to convection beneath the ice sheets.
## Internal structure
Given Winter's size and surface gravity, its mean density has been determined to be 1,844.5 kg/m³, a small fraction of what would be expected for a rocky planet of this size, perhaps 6,000-7,000 kg/m³. In fact, the mean density is even lower than typical surface rock which is around 2,600-2,700 kg/m³. The density of the internal material composing the planet Winter must, therefore, decrease with depth, converse to the usual mechanics of a planet in which density increases towards the core due to the pressure exerted by material above.

The planet cannot be completely hollow because it has a magnetic field which must be generated by a metallic core of some kind, though it is relatively weak for its size. Additionally, Winter's solid crust does seem to be suspended above a partially melted mantle of soft rock since it still exhibits the same kinds of volcanic activity and plate tectonics as a more usual geologically active world, albeit with some unique phenomena such as [[soundquakes]].

These factors appear to suggest the presence of an extremely low-density layer within the planet, between the core and the surface. Comparisons have been drawn to the floating islands of [[Cqa]], large masses of rock and soil which rise out of the sea and hang in the air for centuries before slowly descending. Little is known about the physical mechanism behind the floating islands, but the material on the surface of the objects at least is of normal density.
## Atmosphere
The atmosphere of Winter is composed mainly of nitrogen and oxygen at a pressure of around 100kPa at sea level. Clouds cover around 2/3 of the equatorial band and this proportion increases towards the poles. Combined with the fact that half the planet is covered in ice, this means the planet has a high mean albedo and reflects a high proportion of incoming solar radiation.

At least near the equator, the atmosphere circulates in bands of convection cells covering around 15° latitude, i.e. circulating roughly in the ranges 0°-15° latitude, 15°-30° latitude, etc. Whether or not this structure can be extrapolated all the way to the poles is not known, as the behaviour of the atmosphere at the poles is likely to be very different to the equatorial regions due to a predicted sharp temperature gradient. Estimates have placed the mean air temperature within the polar circles—the areas less than 9.13° from the north and south poles—at less than 200 K and perhaps as low as 80 K, allowing the primary components of air, oxygen and nitrogen, to condense and fall as rain. Even assuming the most conservative temperature estimates, there would still be a significant pressure drop towards the poles which would impact the atmospheric circulation in ways which are hard to model.
# Moons
Winter has two moons which follow roughly circular orbits approximately in the [[Solar system|solar system's]] ecliptic plane. The smaller and nearer moon is known as [[Smallmoon]], while the further and larger is known as [[Bigmoon]].

Viewed from Winter, [[Bigmoon]] appears around 50% wider than the sun, while the variation in the size of [[Smallmoon]] over its orbit overlaps with that of the [[sun]]. This leads to a range of types of partial, annular and total solar eclipses by [[Smallmoon]], total eclipse by [[Bigmoon]] and compound eclipses featuring both moons. 

The gravitational force of both moons have a tidal effect on Winter, though notably less than would be expected given their size and proximity to the planet, particularly in the case of [[Bigmoon]]. This is due to the moons having anomalously low density, even lower than Winter, which may indicate that they have a similar internal composition to Winter itself.

The two moons are in a 4:21 orbital resonance, meaning [[Smallmoon]] orbits 21 times for each four orbits of [[Bigmoon]]. Curiously, their synodic periods are even closer to an integer ratio, 3:19, but this is complete coincidence as there is no physical driving mechanism for this. These data are shown in the table below:

| Moon      | Sidereal period              | Synodic period                |
| --------- | ---------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| Smallmoon | 9.7392387 days (4t₁)         | 10.1310913 days (3t₂)         |
| Bigmoon   | 51.134546 days (21.001455t₁) | 64.164795 days (19.0003603t₂) |