The government of the [[Tyon-Arat]] is a semi-democratic republican government, which divides power among three groups of dignitaries, each with their own limited role within it. 
## Members
### Martu
Main article: [[Martu]]
The Marte (singular: Martu) are the central and elected part of the government. They are the Electors, but make the majority of decisions. It is important to note that the Marte do not have any authority to actually act on their own wishes. They merely decide how something has to be done, but they do not have the authority to command others. Instead they task the [[Kele]] to set into motion the projects they device. A martu needs to be elected by the citizenry, though elections are not competitive, but based on consent. If a certain amount of the citizenry approves of someone as Martu, they are elected, irrespective of other candidates and contenders. All who want to become Martu have to be citizens and furthermore be seen as *respected citizens*, thus they cannot be punished criminals and must be considered virtuous by the public. 
### Kele
Main article: [[Kele]]
The Kele are the second part of the government and those people having de-facto the most authority. However they cannot act on their own wishes, but are tasked by the Marte. Thus every Kele needs their actions to be legitimized by the Marte. Kele have therefore partake in councils in regular intervals and give reports of their actions and take responsibilities. Any Kele who is appointed with a certain job has the freedom to employ more Suf under their authority to help them with it. For example a Kele might be tasked with building a street. So they plan the street, but they employ a second Suf to recruit workers and so on. All Kele work for a certain term. All Kele are by definition required to be [[Suf]]. 
### Stera
Main article: [[Stera]]
The third group are the Stera, who are former Kele, who have passed at least five successful terms and take now a role similar to senators. They have a veto right against the Marte, but cannot task Kele on their own, thus limiting their power to that of advisors. 
## The House of Electors 
The [[Marte Arapa]] is the central place of the Ardanian government. It is usually an eight-sided house, which contains a central meeting room and is located on a plaza in the middle of a city or town. It is where the Marte of the community gather to make decisions. The House of Electors is considered a sacred space and thus is also under certain religious taboo. Armed guards usually guard the entrance against intruders. Priests perform rituals of purification in the interior before and after each meeting to cancel out thoughts of strife and keep the space sacred. If needed though a council can also be held on the plaza in front of the House. In these cases a sacred ritual space is specifically made. In those instances debates are carried out in front of the public to strengthen the accountability of the Electors. 

Each Ardanian town features such a House, although not all of them are made especially for Marte. In small communities these are often just public spaces, which allow for discussions and decision making within the community. 