Kamalism is one of the main religions of [[Oksandanderi]]. Kamalism is not a single centralised faith, but a collection of religious disciplines, sects and schools that follow common tenets and believes. Therefore there is no organization which controls Kamalism, nor a class of priests, which has authority over the entire faith, although there are individual sects, which have leaders. 

The origin of Kamalism is attributed to the religious figure of [[Kamalyeray]], who brought about new religious teachings during the [[5th century]]. The early history of Kamalism is murky and it is not fully accepted whether Kamalyeray was indeed a real person. Most written sources on Kamalism come from the latter half of the [[6th century]]. By that time however Kamalism had spawned other religious movements, such as [[Sumalism]] and [[Túnyërgelde]]. 

## History 
The origins of Kamalism lie within the [[Traditional Oksandanderian faith]], which evolved out of a tribal religion into the urban religion lead by the [[Kost]] priests. The Kost priests would lose their authority during the second half of the [[1st millennium BGS]] and be replaced by the [[Kort]] as leaders of the [[Yarlish people|Yarlish]] city-states. This change of roles might have sparked the first phase of religious upheaval, although during this time, religious authority was still within the hands of the Kost. During the [[2nd century]] the [[Astmergian Empire]] rose to power and fell again. The power vacuum created by this event resulted in the [[History of Oksandanderi#Era of Fragmentation (267 - 512)|Era of Fragmentation]]. This era ushered in several cultural changes in Oksandanderi, on which all following Oks. culture was founded on. 

Wandering preachers became a common sight in this time, as states vied for power and lost it again. Many lamented the destruction of traditional values and morals and advocated for a moral reform. Some proposed a return to the old order of Kost-Theocracies, while others wanted something radically new. The Kamalyeray was one who was taught in the old teachings, but did not advocate the old order. In the legend of the Kamalyeray it is said that he knew the old rituals and the old songs, which had fallen out of usage and that only keeping these alive could secure balance between people, between people and spirits and thus continue the circle of balance and preservation. 

The Kamalyeray lived as wandering ascetic and offered his services to people. He could lead ceremonies to restore balance and thus he gathered followers. Eventually he died in 451 AGS and his followers dispersed through the land. Within the [[Yarlish Lowlands]] they were persecuted, which lead to them fleeing into the [[Makhatganda]]. In 553 AGS the [[Terdiye|Queen of Wisdom]] gave their community asylum and allowed their teachings to spread. 

## Believes and practices 
Kamalism is based on the [[Traditional Oksandanderian faith]] and also claims to be a natural continuation of it or rather a preservation of its most ancient values. Its core tenets are tautological statements about the nature of the world and the causation of all things. Only good creates good, only mercy creates mercy, only truth creates truth. Good cannot be created out of bad things, mercy cannot be created out of cruelty, truth cannot be created out of lies. Everything gives rise to itself. All things are everlasting in their causation and every good deed with recreate itself, as will every bad deed. Humans can chose and have to cultivate the world through the perpetuation of good. 

### Nature of the world
The world is flat and cyclical. There is no transcendence, no reality beyond reality. There are beings which are beyond humans, such as spirits of different kinds. These exist within spaces of their own and go by laws of their own, as do humans beget their own laws. Yet these spaces are not separated from the human world, but intersect. Humans have to spread good word and good deeds to them. Humans may die, but mass and energy are preserved. There is no afterlife, but the cyclical nature of being. Thus all life is returned to life. There might be some believes in regards to reincarnation, but these are considered a possibility, but not a central belief. More importantly is that humans have to interact on friendly terms with the surroundind world through good deeds, which contain the correct performance of rituals and ceremonies. 

### Eternal causation
Everything causes something else, nothing just exists without cause and no action just remains and action on its own. This belief is quite understandable in regards to deeds and also words, given that they trigger reactions in other people, but it is also extended to thoughts. Our thoughts and emotions are as much parts of the world as deeds and words are. Thus they reflect in the world as well. People who carry dark thoughts and fear, must not enter certain places. Many rituals retain traditional believes in ritual purity. These often aim at erasing traces of "bad thoughts" and bad deeds and clean one's mind of impurities. Most Kamalists however have discontinued the stricter variants of these, as the belief in eternal causation contradicts the idea of ritual purity in some sense. The particular branch of [[Túnyërgelde]] however has increased these believes and perpetuates the idea of "pure faith". 

### Balance and cultivation
For Kamalists the world is cyclical and everything has to be perpetuated. Everyone plays a role in this and follows a natural way. To deviate from it might cause chaos and perpetuate bad deeds. Kamalists often compare this to a dance or choreography in which every movement is profound and meaningful. Many Kamalists believe that this dance of balance has to continue beyond death, which leads to some having their remains fashioned into musical instruments used during rituals. While some Kamalists believe in that their very being must become joy and must spread nothing by joy and good deeds, thus becoming one with good deeds, most have a more balanced view. Asceticism is not generally practiced and some believe that it actually deviates from the natural order. Asceticism for its own sake and without "cultivation" are disincentivized. Kamalists are in the end more about mitigation of natural and spiritual forces than any aim in a grander ideal. 

## Relationship to politics 
Kamalism is fundamentally anti-political. They do not advocate the position of great leaders, but self-governance of small communities. Despite this they had a quite close relationship to the government of the [[Makhatganda]] and were officially promoted during some time periods. It might be that early Kamalism was openly anarchist, but that is mostly theoretical. The Kamalyeray himself is said to have a noble background, although not being the son of a King either. Their early political persecution hints at a more aggressive relation to the ideas of states and kings though, some of which might have been erased after their patronage in the Makhatganda. For the most part Kamalist communities are concerned with daily life and morals of the every day person. This is one of the main differences between Kamalism and [[Sumalism]], which does have far reaching political aims. 
Most Kamalists do not stray into the extreme ends of their believes and are complacent with worldly powers. Moreover Kamalism does promote believes in a natural order of power sharing and roles in life and society. Other more radical sects have critisized Kamalists for this. 