The religion of Túnyërgelde "worship without a name" is a branch of [[Kamalism]], which developed during the late [[6th century]]. It is often seen as a very extreme, minimalistic and ascetic branch of Kamalism. Although believers in Túnyërgelde think of their version as the true version of their faith and that Kamalists have forgotten some tenets or mellowed out after they were given political patronage by the [[Makhatganda]]. 

## Worship without a name
The most central characteristic of Túnyërgelde is that members of their communities erase their names. Members are often just called *Kathon* "good man" or *Kakhele* "good woman". Religious figures do not have names either. The [[Kamalyeray]] foremost does not have a name either, his name simply means "hero of good deeds". Members of Túnyërgelde communities are ascetics who strive to live a pure life and have a pure faith. Many members are also iconoclasts, as they do not tolerate the worship of anyone with an identity. They destroy the faces of statues and deface murals. However they still worship the people depicted, but as pure idols, and just for their deeds and not for their persona. Thus the deeds of one become the deeds of all. 

## Asceticism and ego-death 
Members of Túnyërgelde communities are generally asceticists, who believe that one should strive for a pure life. Thus they believe that they have to cleanse themselves of all bad deeds, bad words and bad thoughts. Members have to do repentence and clean themselves by performing rituals of religious purity. They must train their thoughts to be pure. One particular excersize is to spread joy, often through theatrical performances, music and dance. Indeed musical ceremonies and chants are a particular feature of the Túnyërgelde, an aspect, which was taken over from the older [[Peke]] tradition. However Túnyërgeldetí are essentialist about this matter too. They aim to become nothing by a vehicle to spread joy. Their whole being to by dissolved into joy and thankfulness. 