The **Xiyeru creation story** spans several chapters of the [[Xiyeru religion|Xiyeru mythological canon]], recounting the gradual creation of the universe by [[Fururūʼupwa]] and a related group of ancillary primordial deities over the course of several aeons.

Several versions of the story have been told throughout history, with the most influential being first fully compiled and transcribed in the [[Fanaʼaidi Famuru Xiluʼuže]] "tree of stories that flows into the ocean", a [[1st century]] [[Xiri]] mythological compendium.

The chapters of creation were a fundamental part of the [[Xiyeru]] mythological canon, said to have been passed directly from first-hand account from the [[ībarovā|celestial beings]] through generations of [[Sārovā|spirits]], then the [[Tarodaroeru]] and eventually to the first [[Āeruweʼa]] and the [[Xiyeru]], persisting in some form or another for millennia thereafter.

# Chapters

The chapters of the creation story as arranged in the [[Fanaʼaidi Famuru Xiluʼuže]] are not consecutive, rather they belong to successive "aeons" of cosmological history with events in between. The [[Xiyeru]] considered themselves to live in the sixth aeon, with creation having taken place over the five prior aeons:

1. The early universe and the first [[ībarovā|celestial beings]].
2. The creation and development of the planet [[Winter]], before the introduction of animal life.
3. The creation of humans and the second generation of [[ībarovā|celestials]].
4. The creation of the [[Winter#Moons|moons of Winter]], other land animals, and the third generation of [[ībarovā|celestials]].
5. The settlement of the cosmos into its present state.

## The early universe

There was once a timeless, empty void with only a single, formless being, **[[Fururūʼupwa]]**. Out of [[Fururūʼupwa]], three other conscious entities emerged. These four primordial beings were called **[[ībarovā]]** "celestial spirit", derived from *[[Xiri dictionary#rhovā|rhovā]]* which alone more typically means mind. In some versions of the story, the secondary [[ībarovā]] were a deliberate creation of [[Fururūʼupwa]], and especially later in history they were called the first children of [[Fururūʼupwa]]. Their names in [[Xiri]] are **[[Faraʼeība]]**, **[[Fadanaūmu]]** and **[[Fayobozimi]]**, which are *[[Ńuʼu#Mūʼojūńuʼu|mūʼojūńuʼu]]* "forever names", titles granted in recognition of lifetime achievements, which for the mortal [[Xiyeru]] was a strictly posthumous part of the [[Ńuʼu|personal name]]. The [[Xiyeru]] recognised that these were their own post-factum epithets and believed that the true, original names of the celestial spirits were known only to [[Fururūʼupwa]].

[[Faraʼeība]] created light and filled the universe with it, earning their name *fa-raʼe-ība* "who burns the sky", while [[Fadanaūmu]] created the flow of time. [[Fayobozimi]] then used both of these aspects to create physical forms and granted them to all the celestials. [[Fayobozimi]] showed great humility and gave [[Fururūʼupwa]] the most spectacular radiant form of all, while still making sure their own form was a little larger and brighter than [[Faraʼeība]] and [[Fadanaūmu]]. These were mere avatars, simple representations of the [[ībarovā]] capable of interacting with the physical universe, since the realisation of their true forms was well beyond any of their powers. It has been said that if [[Fururūʼupwa]] were able to physically manifest in their entirety, their body would be infinitely large and their skin [[Ńaʼay|tattooed]] with all possible histories, past, present and future. Nonetheless, the [[Xiyeru]] typically depicted each [[ībarovā]] as a human figure [[Ńaʼay|tattooed]] with the symbols of their forever name, though it was explicitly acknowledged that such anthropomorphism was nothing more than an artistic device.

## The lifeless world

[[Fururūʼupwa]] was inspired by their progeny to create a physical realm separated from **[[Tanuswība]]**, the realm of pure light, by a spherical firmament, inside which they generated three new substances. The first, after [[Faraʼeība|Faraʼeība's]] invention of light, was **[[ūžāraza|ībaraza]]** "sky stuff", in which the celestials could reside. Inside this, a sphere of flowing **[[ūžāraza|ūmuraza]]** "water stuff" to complement [[Fadanaūmu|Fadanaūmu's]] temporal current. Finally, inspired by [[Fayobozimi]], they lifted **[[ūžāraza|pwaraza]]** "land stuff" from the sea and sculpted its shape. These acts are the namesake of the creator, *f-uru-rūʼu-pwa* "who forms the sea and the land". Thereafter, the first children remained custodians of their respective [[ūžāraza|fundamental substances]].

For an aeon, [[Fururūʼupwa]] was content with the world they had built for their unruly children, who continued to create as they squabbled and played. During this time, [[Fayobozimi]] made caves and forests, [[Faraʼeība]] fire and volcanoes, and [[Fadanaūmu]] earned their name *fa-dana-ūmu* "who guides water" by creating rivers and waves. All were in a constant battle of creation and destruction, but the world remained devoid of the essence of life which only the [[ībarovā]] possessed. As the children matured, their disputes turned morose and, growing sick and tired of the dull inanimate world, they fell into a long, silent feud.

## The first humans

[[Fururūʼupwa]] decided to try something new. They pored over the world and found [[Udovuʼo]], islands which had been toyed with and abandoned by the bickering siblings. From the largest island, [[Erido]], they took clay in their left hand and formed it into a woman, and in their right hand with clay from [[Azodo]] in the south, a man, and breathed life into them. They were known as **[[Kiyeru]]** "north-person" and **[[Ńiyeru]]** "south-person". Folk etymology told that *[[Xiri dictionary#eru|eru]]* "person" was broken down as *e-ru* "from-clay". [[Fururūʼupwa]], as the [[sun]], remained fixed in the northern sky at this time, and in this way led [[Ńiyeru]] to the main island where he met [[Kiyeru]] and fell in love.

Love, then, was the first creation not by the celestials, but by mankind. This delightful surprise caused three more [[ībarovā]] to emerge, either from [[Fururūʼupwa]] directly or splitting off from the others. The second three children were in many ways mirror images of the first, each embodying similar, sometimes opposite characteristics, and were more associated with human aspects. For example, where each first child is connected to air, water and land, so each second child is to one of the three corresponding [[Xiyeru#Parts of the self|parts of the human self]]: mind, blood and body. The second children also each represented one of the three different [[Xiyeru#Gender|genders recognised by the Xiyeru]], unlike the genderless first children. [[Fururūʼupwa]] wondered if each pair might fall in love and live in harmony like the humans.

The new generation were fascinated by [[Kiyeru]] and [[Ńiyeru]] and chose to help them develop. **[[Fazegiri]]** "who gives language" granted the ability to speak, while **[[Fabepwes]]** "who distributes fish" and **[[Famenekwi]]** "who cultivates yams" provided food by filling the waters with animal life and teaching them to farm crops respectively. Other important aspects of life and culture such as land animals, rice, [[Ńaʼay|tattoos]], and marriage, were later developments credited in varying degrees to humanity.

The first children were enamored by the activities of the younger cohort and, just as [[Fururūʼupwa]] had hoped, each pair formed a loving parternship. Some traditions held that the first children took on genders opposing their partners in the process, following the model of [[Kiyeru]] and [[Ńiyeru]], though with one couple both [[Xiyeru#Third gender|third-gendered]]. The first children then followed their partners in each contributing something to humanity. [[Faraʼeība]] gave them fire to cook their food, [[Fadanaūmu]] bestowed the ability to procreate and ushered the first human child **[[Xama]]** "mountain spring", and [[Fayobozimi]] taught them to build houses and form families and villages. It was not quite the era of peace [[Fururūʼupwa]] had dreamed of, however.

## Lesser spirits

Each celestial couple bore three children, again one of each gender, forming the third generation and completing the set of 16 [[ībarovā]]. These nine were of a different kind to their predecessors, not radiant beings of quite such cosmic power, but invisible and each of a more unique character and faculty. There were countless further descendants who, being born of the physical world, were not [[ībarovā]] but **[[Sārovā]]** "lesser spirits". A few chose to walk amongst mankind, others became mythical beasts, while many more remained invisible spirits in the air, some benign and some malignant.

**[[Āhiñu]]**, **[[Āvāń]]** and **[[Āzava]]** were the sons of the three couples and bitter rivals. There are many stories of their antics, culminating in the most famous tragedy in the [[Xiyeru]] canon. The cousins saw the world as already well-developed with little of their influence and sought to create their own, complete with peoples with whom they could play god. [[Āhiñu]] took great care in constructing a modest world but, in attempting to breathe the essence of life into it, accidentally burnt it to ash. [[Āvāń]] created a larger world and, believing it was amply sized, brashly flooded it with water, leaving no land for people to live. [[Āzava]], seeking to one-up them both, created a gigantic world which fell from the sky into the ocean and sank, pulling [[Āzava]] himself with it and drowning him. *Ā-zava* means "great-death", named so because he was the first being to die in the universe and subsequently became the spiteful god of death. From his abyssal cave, he cursed all life on [[Winter]] with mortality for the rest of time. The two surviving cousins were punished for their hubris by [[Fururūʼupwa]], who cast them into the cores of their dead proto-worlds for eternity. From there, they were to act together as a [[Fururūʼupwa#Eye of Fururūʼupwa|great eye or pair of eyes]] through which [[Fururūʼupwa]] would surveil all such mischievous spirits, and perhaps people too, who sought to bend the universe to their will, thus forming the two [[Winter#Moons|moons of Winter]].

## Final acts of the celestials

The spirits of the deceased began to accumulate in the air, so [[Fayobozimi]] resolved to carry them and all future spirits up into [[Tanuswība]] to be reabsorbed into the primordial light from which everything came. As they did so, they punctured holes in the firmament, forming the stars. [[The Glob]], the large accumulation of stars in the southern celestial hemisphere, is associated with the **[[Tarodaroeru]]** "ancient people", the first human civilisation who are said to have inhabited [[Udovuʼo]] and founded the [[Xiyeru]] culture in the following aeon. Among them are a pair of bright stars called **[[Xiyeru astronomy#Messenger stars|Uvōmeru]]** "the spouses" representing the first married [[Xiyeru]] couple and the brightest star in the sky, and **[[Xiyeru astronomy#Messenger stars|Āzimi]]**, the remnant of the legendary first [[Āeruweʼa]], **[[Fanaʼažimyu Āeruweʼa]]** "who speaks the truth", said to be a direct matrilineal descendant of [[Kiyeru]]. [[Fayobozimi]] carefully arranged these stars so as to provide ancestral knowledge to later generations of [[Xiyeru]], thus finally earning their name *fa-yobo-zimi* "who rules the stars".

[[Fururūʼupwa|Fururūʼupwa's]] final act was to embark on a perpetual voyage around the world, creating the cycle of day and night and ensuring that all things would continue to change and never stagnate again, and to teach humanity that even eternal things must ebb and flow. [[Fayobozimi]] led the other five children to follow [[Fururūʼupwa]], and thereafter all six celestial children continued to move around the sky as the visible planets, following the [[sun]]. Each time an inferior planet happens to fall in the same constellation as the superior planet corresponding to their lover, the [[Xiyeru]] would hold a feast called **[[ībagābo]]*** "celestial wedding", a mock ceremony for the celestial couples who never married in their time, complete with all the festivities of a real wedding.