---
tags:
  - person
---

**Huxŭkală** was a descendent of a student of [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu]] who, in the early [[9th century]], rediscovered his work via centuries-old documents and letters belonging to her ancestor, held in her family collection ever since. Had she not done so, [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro's]] work may have been lost forever, as it had not yet entered the "official" canon of [[Xiyeru]] ideas by way of being preserved and taught within the [[garden palace|garden palaces]]. She is most well known as the founder of a school to teach [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro's]] methods, for which she is called the first **[[tehătonehălu]]** "person who walks by way of repeated steps", which might be translated as "proceduralist" or "algorithmist".

The teachings of her school would suggest that she made some important contributions to mathematics herself, though unusually little is known about her. She is considered a woman but even that much is not known. Her only name *huxŭkală* is said to have been passed down orally by students of the school, but has no apparent meaning or written form. The name is given here in [[Ahōtoli]], but this would not have been her first language since she hailed from [[Kigipwa]], the far north island of [[Udovuʼo]]. Likewise, [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro]] would have spoken [[Xiri]] only as a second language later in life.

While [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro]] had focused on arithmetic and geometric sequences, where terms are related by a common difference or ratio, [[Huxŭkală]] expanded his methods to other similar types of sequences like the Fibonacci sequence (the one that starts 1, 1, and yields each term by adding the last two, so continues 2, 3, 5, 8, 13 etc). She was not the first to note the existence of the sequence, in fact it naturally appears in many simple combinatorial counting problems, but she was the first to describe its mathematical properties, comparing it to geometric sequences like the powers of two (1, 2, 4, 8, 16...). 

Huxŭkală used Fibonacci numbers to correct what she believed was [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro's]] biggest mistake: the assumption that all numbers can be expressed as the ratio of two integers. She proved that the ratio of two successive terms of the sequence, e.g. 5/3, 8/5, 13/8 etc, converges to some number which cannot be rationally expressed. She never attempted to actually evaluate the infinite limit, which turns out to be the golden ratio (1 + √5)/2 (1.61803...), the number whose square (2.61803...) is equal to itself + 1. The first proof of the irrationality of a known number was of √2 (1.41421...), the length of the diagonal of a unit square, an achievement accredited to Huxŭkală but more likely developed by her **[[tehătonehălu|algorithmist]]** school shortly after her death.

Huxŭkală's school tried to make [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro's]] theoretical and conceptual work more accessible by giving it more tangible geometric applications, but they were still not widely accepted. In fact they were derided by contemporary scholars who countered that if you were to actually perform one of [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro's]] infinite tasks, you always reach a paradox, so the mathematical results could not be considered meaningful. Take one of his infinite series of ever smaller walks for example: you must not only complete an infinite number of them, but also eventually make a walk of zero length, and this zero-walk, by adding nothing to the total, somehow brings the length of the walk up to its complete total, which all seems impossible and even nonsensical. In some ways they had a point, the methods of [[Inaʼaro Faweʼēyezuravujuweu|Inaʼaro]] and Huxŭkală were far ahead of their time and relied on too many unintuitive assumptions about the nature of infinite series, which do happen to be true but were not actually proven at the time. With a better understanding of infinity and infinitesimals, the theories would be truly infallible, but it was not yet to be. The paradox of infinity might have become a question of great importance to mathematics and philosophy in a different time and place, but instead was simply disregarded in the context of the period's conservative elite culture.