The Northern-Kory Pre-Metallic Complex or short NKPM was a late neolithic culture that existed for several centuries during the [[1st millennium BGS]] in an area later known as [[Bezgon]]. The NKPM is primarily characterised by its lack manufacturing metal tools. 
## Beginning 

The beginnings of the NKPM are unclear and it is generally thought that they originate from prior similar late neolithic cultures. The traditional beginning of the culture is often linked to the expansion of [[Koyanic languages]] and the arrival of the ancestors of [[Hnäzb people]], as well as maybe [[Nambic peoples]]. More broader classifications place the beginning of the NKPM into the more distant past, as it would characterise all pre-metallic culture of northern Koty and southern [[Krobu]]. The cultural cenith of the culture is traditionally placed into the 8th and 7th century, right before the widespread adoption of metallurgy. After the introduction of metallurgy, the NKPM continues and is precisely defined by its lack of metal manufacturing and a continued neolithic lifestyle. 
## Collapse 

After metallurgy is introduced, the [[Old Krobu Maritime Culture]] or OKM develops in the vicinity of the NKPM. There are debates about how much the NKPM and the OKM overlap and whether the NKPM is ancestral to the OKM or not. This discussion is broadly summarised by the autochthonous and expansionist theories. Most scholars of later ages agree that the NKPM was not ancestral to the OKM and that with the rise of the OKM, the NKPM becomes increasingly marginalised, so that the flourishing of the OKM might even be the cause of the impoverishment of the NKPM. 

During the 5th and 4th century BGS, the NKPM begins to experience an enormous decline. There is no transition between new OKM settlements and NKPM settlements, instead the latter seem to be simply given up. Grave goods and other artefacts become increasingly simple and some human remains even begin to show signs of malnourishment. During the 3rd and 2nd century the NKPM collapses in less than a century. In around the time of two generations all settlements of the NKPM are given up and the culture transforms into the [[South-Koyanic Pastoralic Complex]]. 
## Lifestyle

The people of the NKPM were sedentary pastoralists, who lived in the lowlands and riverine meadows of Bezgon. They mainly herded cattle and had a small scale agriculture, focusing mostly on gardens instead of acres. Settlements were relatively small and are best called villages. These villages had no walls and there are no signs of fortifications. Settlements also didn't last very long and experienced regular intervals of rising and declining populations. It seems that once a settlement became too large, a large part of its inhabitants moved out and founded a new settlement. Settlements might be connected by clan structures, but there is no evidence for anything like state-level organisation. 

Given its name, the NKPM is defined by a lack of metalworking, yet there are metal artefacts found among NKPM goods. Most of them old and worn down tools, mostly knives, axes and adzes. Neither metalic arrowheads now speartips are found among NKPM artefact, nor swords among grave goods. Metal artefacts are indeed only found as tools, thought of as too valuable to just toss them away, although other factors might have inhibited their use for grave goods. Either way, if they acquired metal tools, the NKPM were making a deficit, which likely contributed to their demise. 
## Language 

The language most commonly associated with the NKPM is [[Hnäzb languages|Hnäzb]]. Other candidates are [[Qachkav languages|Qachkav]] languages or early [[Nambic languages|Nambic]]. The question hinges on how old one makes the NKPM to be and whether it is ancestral to other cultures like the OKM or the [[Old Bezgon Culture]]. The NKPM did not leave any writing, so their linguistic identity relies on estimations of glottochronology.  