---
tags:
  - history
---
The **Old Krobu Maritime Culture** or **OKM** was an early metallic culture, which was vastly successful and covered large parts of [[Krobu]] and extended into the northern reaches of [[Kóty]] and as far north as [[Qnōp']]. It contributed to the spread of the ancestors of the [[Nambāno]] and [[Arklobu]] peoples and languages. 

## Early OKM (7th - 4th century BGS)
Later scholars of ancient cultures developed two competing theories of how the OKM began. The first is the *Autochthonous Theory*, which states that the ancestors of the OKM, who were [[Koyanic languages|Koyanic]] people spread northward prior to the invention of metallurgy in [[Kóty]] and reached [[Krobu]] before the beginning or around the start of the [[1st millennium BGS]]. These people could have been part of the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM culture]], though some reject this notion also. When metallurgy began to spread from central Kóty during the [[8th century BGS]], the Koyanic people of [[Krobu]] adopted it and brought about the OKM. 
A variation of this theory speculates on the so called [[Old Bezgon Culture|Old Bezgon (OB)]] culture, a southern extension, relative or ancestor of the OKM. The [[Old Bezgon Culture|OB culture]] is theorised to have existed from the 10th to the [[5th century BGS]]. The problem is that the [[Old Bezgon Culture|OB culture]] is hardly distinguishable from other forms of the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM]] and later seems just to be a regional type of the OKM. 

The competing theory is called the *Expansion Theory* and states that the northern reach of [[Koyanic languages]] prior to the invention of metallurgy did not extend beyond [[Bezgon]] and was likely even more southerly. The invention of metallurgy caused several waves of expansion and migration within central [[Kóty]], which kickstarted the migration of [[Koyanic peoples]] into all directions. With their new metal tools, the OKM ancestors would rapidly colonise [[Krobu]]. The problem with this theory is the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM]] itself and its likely [[Koyanic peoples|Koyanic]] affiliation. The [[Gäj languages]] would have formed a uniform block within northern [[Kóty]], which begs the question, where the Urheimat of the [[Namb languages]] was. 

Nonetheless migration and expansion did take place and the early OKM is primarily characterised by the spread of metalworking all around [[Krobu]], with the exception of the cultural backwaters, which remain part of the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM]]. It is unclear why the people of the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM]] persisted without metalworking and despite increasing poverty for the following centuries. Maybe they simply saw no point in it, as metals did not immediately increase the efficiency of their lifestyle either. Trade with OKM sites allowed them limited access to metal tools in the capacity they needed. 

## Mature OKM (4th - 2nd century BGS)
The OKM reaches its cultural zenith and largest expansion, with several major centers in [[Krobu]]. OKM tools and artefacts can be found all over [[Krobu]], reaching north as far as [[Qnōp'.]] Their southward reach is more limited though. They are found at the coastal regions of westernmost [[Kóty]], but do not reach into central [[Kóty]]. [[Ansang Islands|Ansang]] also doesn't have OKM artefacts either. 

If scholars would make isotope analysis of the tools, one would find out that even those in [[Qnōp']] were manufactured in [[Krobu]] and brought there by communities of traders, the active migration of metalworkers seems to have ceased and local elites "hoard" that knowledge. Maybe traders are also organised in guilds that monopolise certain trades. If one would examine human remains found in [[Qnōp']], one could find out that many were born in [[Krobu]] and migrated later in life to [[Qnōp']]. If one would make genetic research, one would find out that some people that were born in [[Qnōp']] did have ancestors in [[Krobu]]. 

It is unclear whether there was state-level organisation between different OKM sites during this time or whether villages and towns formed small independent units. However there was one cosmopolitan element in their society, which connected traders and artisans alike. Some people have theorised about guild like organizations, which dominated trade and formed cosmopolitan proto-states. 

At the same time as the OKM flourishes, the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM]] seems to collapse. During the [[2nd century BGS]] the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM]] suddenly vanishes, with almost all settlements being given up in a matter of 40 years. What follows is a rapid transition to pastoralism.

## Regionalisation Period / Terminal (2nd century BGS - 2nd century AGS) 
The Regionalisation period is the finale stage of the OKM and is regarded as the transition to the [[Krobuan Preclassic]] period. While classical OKM artefacts remain in use, new artefacts and innovative technologies appear, among them the [[Yayamok type canoe]]. New artefacts are particularly regional and indicate the presence of states or at least individual polities. While [[Arklobu peoples]]' histories may refer to this period, it should be kept in mind that writing was not yet in use in [[Krobu]] and would not for several more centuries. Thus the histories, which go back to this time period should be taken with skepticism. 

## Language 
The people of the OKM undoubtedly spoke a [[Koyanic languages|Koyanic]] language. The candidates for the language of the people are languages ancestral to [[Nambāno]] and [[Arklobu]] or the common ancestor of both. The terminal OKM, especially its northern and insular variety is probably a language directly ancestral to [[Old Nambāno]]. There seems to be an old layer of loanwords, which might come from other [[Koyanic languages]], among them [[Proto-Hnäzb language|Proto-Hnäzb]], which was spoken by the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex|NKPM]] culture and the [[South-Koyanic Pastoralic Complex]]. This layer is small and given it is from one [[Koyanic languages|Koyanic language]] to another, its status is obscured by later sound changes. More recent strata of [[Hnäzb languages|Hnäzbic]] loanwords date from the [[5th century]] and the most recent one from the [[10th century]].  