The **Hnäzb** are a semi-nomadic people who inhabit the [[Red Steppe]] and neighboring regions, such as the [[Uhustaw]], which they call [[Čüüwän]]. 

## Name and Identity
The term Hnäzb is foremost linguistic in nature and identifies people who speak the [[Hnäzb languages]]. Though the same people also share a common lifestyle and culture, they are internally diverse and the way they regard each other is differentiated by tribal and social affiliations. The term itself might as well have only meant the nomadic upper class of these people, who were during their history also the most prolific and infamous in other lands. 

## History
### Proto-Hnäzb period 
The so called Proto-Hnäzb is both a linguistic and historical time period, which roughly covers the time from around [[1st millennium BGS|1000 BGS]] till around 0 AGS and makes up the genesis of Hnäzbic culture and language. The Proto-Hnäzb period consists of the linguistic and cultural transition from a broader [[Q'ač culture]].

Proto-Hnäzb probably originates from a region in northern [[Kóty]] or southern [[Krobu]], an area later known as [[Bezgon]], slightly northwest to the area of early [[Qachkav people]], their closest linguistic relatives. The environment of this area consists of temperate oceanic lowlands and forests, as well as small hills. This makes it overall pretty different from the [[Red Steppe]], where most of later Hnäzb culture was situated. This also meant that the lifestyle of early Proto-Hnäzb was likely rather different from their later descendants. In archaeological terms, the culture inhabiting northernmost [[Koty]] during this time is called the [[Northern-Koty Pre-Metallic Complex]] (NKPMC).  
Proto-Hnäzb culture was probably still very close to early [[Q'achkav culture]]. At the same time there is a slight difference between the inhabitants of the coast and the hinterlands. Due to the lack of written records and general cultural similarity it is not clear which of these groups spoke an early [[Gäj languages|Gäj language]] and which ones spoke [[Proto-Hnäzb language|Proto-Hnäzb]].

The Proto-Hnäzb were for the most part not nomadic, but had a pastoral lifestyle and lived in small village communities. They primarily herded cattle. Despite their lush homeland there is no indication that they practised large scale agriculture, nor that they build large settlements or even cities. Apart from pastoralism they also practised horticulture and were occasional foragers. There is some indication for conflict with the neighbouring mountain tribes, as well as early [[Koto-Dreic languages|Dreic]] cultures.

Around the [[8th century BGS]] tin-based bronze metallurgy was developed in [[Koty]], the Proto-Hnäzb did not produce any metal on their own and only bought bronze tools and weapons from the hill tribes. The Proto-Hnäzb did not practice any metalwork on their own, as signs of extended use of metal tools shows. While there is some amount of both metal tools and weapons, it is still miniscule compared to central [[Koty]]. Around this time, likely connected to the increasing trade in bronze, first migrations northward appeared. The first migrants north were likely speakers of early [[Namb languages]], which could already have diversified into its [[Northern Namb languages|northern]] and [[Southern Namb languages|southern]] branches. A much more mobile maritime culture spread fast north along coastal [[Krobu]], dubbed the [[Old Krobu Maritime Culture]] (OKM). The likely carriers of Proto-Hnäzb culture spread generally slower during this age and continued a village based pastoralist lifestyle.

By the end of the Proto-Hnäzb period there was a phase of transition, which introduced several important markers of later Hnäzb culture. During the [[2nd century BGS]] the so called [[South-Koyanic Pastoralic Complex]] came into being. This culture saw a very fast spread over a short amount of time and is very likely connected to late Proto-Hnäzb. The SKP migrated from northern [[Koty]] into eastern [[Krobu]].
### Steppe Expansion  (0-300 AGS)
At around 0 AGS a very fast spreading culture existed in southern [[Koyan]]. The carriers of this culture had a very mobile and expansionist lifestyle and both engaged into extensive trade and raiding of coastal settlements. At the same time they increasingly spread northward into the [[Red Steppe]]. The inhabitants of the [[Red Steppe]] prior to this expansion were, amongst others likely speakers of [[Upic languages|Upic languages]]. Their lifestyle in essence resembled that of pre-expansion Proto-Hnäzb. People lived in small tribal communities strewn all over the vast steppes. They also occupied small villages and farmsteads and herded [[Ugo]] and engaged in hunting the animals of the steppe. There is no indication of any large polity occupying any part of the steppe. The pre-Hnäzb steppe people also did not practise any metallurgy.

The expansion of early Hnäzb happened in a time frame from around [[Universal calendar|year 0]] until the end of the [[3rd century]]. It introduced a highly mobile tribal elite, which engaged in warfare, raiding, as well as ritual activity for the sake of gaining prestige. Hnäzb storytellers remember this time period as an age of heroes, in which mighty ancestor figures claimed huge areas of land, carried out raids against each other and founded new powerful clans. The first great incursion of Hnäzb into the [[Red Steppe]] occurred in [[1st century|56 AGS]]. Around 100 AGS already it seems that a large polity, be it a single tribe or tribal federation was gaining power in the central steppes. This pattern continued. In 211 AGS the Hnäzb reached the later region of [[Uhustaw]] for the first time. At around 300 AGS the complete area settled by modern Hnäzb speakers was settled already. At the same time, the southernmost extend of Hnäzb culture disappeared as quickly as the rest spread north. In northern [[Koty]] and southern [[Krobu]], speakers of Hnäzb shifted towards [[Arklobu languages]].

### Age of the Great Herds (300-700 AGS)
The main phase of Hnäzb power is called the [[Age of Great Herds]] and lasted from the [[4th century]] through to the early [[8th century]]. The period began with the rise of the great clans, which in Hnäzb historical narratives always numbered 25. What actually made any tribe a great tribe is up to debate and the inclusion or exclusion of one tribe or another is pretty much based on cultural symbolism. In [[4th century|323 AGS]] the tribe of [[Red-Deer]] came to power in the western central steppes. [[Red-Deer]] build a powerful tribal federation. In 331 he became powerful enough to carry out raids into the coastal lowlands. According to songs he waged war against seven powerful cities and subjugated them. This event marked the beginning of a series of conflicts between the steppes and the lowlands. These conflicts shaped both the culture of the lowlands, as well as of the steppes.

During a short lived war in [[6th century|561]] the federation of [[Five-Spears]] carried out an eastward invasion into the [[Murfa people|Murfa]] area. They destroyed the town of [[Phaseta]] and carried its inhabitants off. In the following year they returned, but the people along the [[Murfa river]] fled into the desert and carried out a successive war of attrition against the steppe people, who were quite frankly out of their element. Ambassadors were also sent from Murfa to [[Ksuray]] in the [[Tyon-Arat]]. Quickly a small garrison was build along the [[Murfa river|Murfa]]. This contact meant, that for the next centuries [[Ardanic people|Ardanians]] were discouraged from any westward exploration and saw the steppe as dangerous place of potential danger. Despite small encounters, where were no further conflicts between the two groups and apart from contacts along the [[Murfa river|Murfa]], [[Ardanic people|Ardanians]] had no further contact with Hnäzbic cultures till the [[9th century]].

In the following centuries several great steppe federations arose and fell again. By the end of the [[7th century]] they became increasingly short lived and betrayal and rebellion was rampant. Great lords rose on one day, to be betrayed and killed on the next. At the same time, the coastal lowlands had become increasingly defensive and could easily fight off invading nomads. Thus the prestige and power of the old lords had come out of reach for many of them. In 645 the last large war between the lowlands cities and the steppe lords occurred. All the cities, which until then had to pay tribute could regain their full independence. The once mighty clan of [[Celestial-Dancer]] was completely destroyed during this conflict and left a power vacuum on the steppes. In the successive decades no powerful lord could claim their position and the steppes descendent into increasing infighting. The great tribes had fallen and no one could take their place any more.

### The Age of Fracturing: 700-900
The age of cultural and political decline which is called the Age of Fracturing began in the early [[8th century]] and lasted until the middle of the [[9th century]]. Only the late [[9th century]] saw a renewed rise in Hnäzb power, but this time mostly connected to an emerging west-[[Fountainhead]] trade network.

The great clans of the Hnäzb split into smaller and smaller clans. Politically there were no new large federations being formed. The old Hnäzb elite went into decline and mostly impoverished, while culture became increasingly more local. On the linguistic side, this loss of political unity also coincided with an increase in linguistic diversification among the [[Hnäzb languages]], although there is no direct cause and effect between these two developments. The Hnäzb tribes which were closest to the [[Nambic peoples|Nambic cultures]] even began to enter a relation of vassalage with some of them.

## Society 
### General Lifestyle and Economy
Most Hnäzb are pastoralists who rely on the [[Ugo]] and to a lesser extent cattle for their livelihood. While the elite of Hnäzb culture takes great pride in their nomadic lifestyle, not all of Hnäzb are nomadic. In fact there are small towns and settlements everywhere in Hnäzb territory, even in the high steppe. Although the settled people of the high steppe are largely impoverished farmers living off planting tubers. The majority of Hnäzb are semi-nomadic and rely on pastoralism, they annually migrate between different pastures. The highest strata of Hnäzb society are fully nomadic and travel over vast distances. They rely on tribute from vassal tribes and are mostly concerned with upholding intertribal relations, ritual activity and both trade and war.

### Hierarchy
Main article: [[Hnäzb social order]]
Hnäzb society is highly stratified, mostly based on lifestyle, but still a degree of some social mobility. In fact Hnäzb culture high encourages people to seek prestige and climb up the social hierarchy. One of the defining factors or Hnäzb society is that wealth is measured in ownership of Ugo.

The symbolic narrative is that there are five parts to Hnäzb society. In fact there are more social groups, with some having almost the character of subethnicities.

5) The lowest group are outsiders or subdued foreigners.
4) The next group are the [[Knaqh]]-dwellers, settled farmers living in farmsteads and villages under Hnäzb control. They don't herd any [[ugo]], which excludes them from the semi-nomadic lifestyle viewed as central to Hnäzb culture. Yet they also play a vital part in Hnäzb economy as they cultivate various crops and most importantly provide with textiles and metals. Hnäzb culture, as opposed to its predecessors knows metal work and despite hardly mining anything themselves and acquiring ores mostly through trading and raiding, have highly skilled blacksmiths. The actual boundary between the settled population and the semi-nomadic one is also very fluid and there is a larger divide between different professions than between villagers and pastoralists. Most villagers keep at least a few [[ugo]], as well as cattle, and most pastoralists cultivate small gardens alongside their homes. The only people who truly own no [[ugo]] are craftspeople like smiths, carpenters and weavers. On the linguistic side, the specific vocabulary of these professions, besides the smith of course, is littered with substrate words.
3) In the traditional view the group above the villagers are the Steppe-dwellers, who make up the bulk of Hnäzb population. They are semi-nomadic people who live off pastoralism and annually migrate between pastures. There is usually a certain area in which migration takes place and during the winter, people often return to specific locations to make camp. 
2) The next traditional class of Hnäzb society are the priests called Star-Eyes. Among them are also the [[Sun-Moon-Singers]] a specific group of priests who act as poets composing epics to embellish the exploits of past heroes and great leaders. These priests act as storytellers and keep track of the histories of the Hnäzb peoples. Although stories often contain both real and mythical elements and are highly stylised. Other priests carry out important ritual events or engage in divining. While some priests do inherit their position, for others it is an office which can be gained, while again others feel chosen by the gods and become priests through that calling. Thus belonging to the priest class is like the other classes a fluid matter in actuality. 
1) The highest social stratum of Hnäzb society is the most prominent. They are called [[Ugo-Lords]]. This warrior elite is highly mobile and engages in most high prestige activities. They make up the leadership of the clans and care for intertribal relations. While they highly idolize war, they are not just warriors, but also traders and diplomats. In fact the typical warrior image makes up only a fraction of their actual lifestyle. Many actually never go to war. They need to be mobile to constantly hold up and curate relations with their allies and establish new connections. Adding to that they engage in ritual activities and regularly hold festives. Their exploits are immortalised in Hnäzb epic poems and legends and there is an ideological component of gaining prestige and aiming to stand among those mythical ancestral figures. While social strata are envisioned as closed groups, there is still a mobility among them. Due to the ideology component people are encouraged to seek warrior's glory to become part of that elite. As such the actual number and power of the great clans can vary from time to time and new clans can rise, while old go into decline. 

### Gender
The Hnäzb keep track of both patrilineal and matrilineal lines and assign different property to each. They believe that divine abilities are inherited through the female line, although they are different in men and women.

According to their believes, humans were originally hermaphroditic, but were split into sexes by the gods after the fall of the world tree. There is also an equivalent of the [[Nambō]] [[Nambō#ōsapnē|ōsapnē]]/[[Nambō#ōsapnē|tilibbō]], a third gender which is believed to originate from the convergence of two divine male and female lines and thus can transcend that gender binary. They often belong to the priest class as they are believed to have special powers. These people, neither male nor female, represent and amendment of the original separation and are thus closer to the divine original humans. 

### Religion
Main article: [[Hnäzb religion]] 
The religion of the Hnäzb people carries the typical hallmarks of any [[Koyanic languages|Koyanic]] religion, but has several motifs of its own, which make it unique. 

The cosmology of the Hnäzb is dominated by a five-part worldview. The world consists of five spheres, which are both separated and connected. The uppermost sphere consists of pure light and is the realm of the sun and the moons. The sphere below it is that of the sky, the wind and the clouds, which are thought to be spirits or celestial [[Ugo]]. The middle sphere is the earthen sphere, which is inhabited by humans, animals and plants and other beings. Then there is the realm of water and the ocean. Lastly there is a subterranean realm or underworld, which is accessible through caves. 

The Hnäzb believe in a multitude of spirits, but the most important of them are ancestor spirits and the [[Ädłäähn]] household spirits. Among the larger gods, there is the sun god called [[Qhatłat']] or "Lord Sun" and the ocean deity called "Queen Ocean". There are further great gods, like the daughters of the moons and the Ugo on the clouds, which graze on the celestial sphere itself. Although these gods are important for the cosmology and certain daily rituals, they are generally sidelined in most rituals. They represent forces of nature that humans ought to pay respect to, but cannot influence in a meaningful way, as they are too powerful to directly interact with anyway. Most Hnäzb religious ceremonies focus more on smaller spirits and deities. 
Hnäzb holy places follow two types, the stationary [[Taha]] and the mobile [[Hmııt'aaqh]]. [[Taha]] is a name generally given to sacred spaces and they can be the locality of village shrines and wayshrines. 

## Art and Storytelling 
The Hnäzb do not have a written language. Instead they rely on an oral tradition transmitted by the Sun-Moon-Singers. Another tool to tell their histories is their traditional art displayed on their houses and within [[Taha]]. These depictions consist of figures drawn in white on a red background. They are highly abstract in nature and contain a system of iconography. 