---
tags:
  - Xiyeru_politics
---
The **Azodo Government** was the governing body of the [[Xiyeru Confederation]], an oligarchic confederation of states representing each of the five islands of [[Udovuʼo]]. It was the first organisation to impose a systematic law code across all [[Udovuʼo|five islands]], primarily concerning the economy of trade and commerce, making the [[Xiyeru Confederation|confederation]] the first unified [[Xiyeru]] state in [[Udovuʼo]].
# Origin and structure
Three principal parts of government had historically existed in varying forms in [[Udovuʼo]] (the names given here are in the [[Ahōtoli]] language):
- **[[Āʼiyoru|Aʼiolu]]** — The governors, one for each of the five islands, originally a mostly ceremonial role. They were democratically elected and, after filling the power vacuum left by the [[Āeruweʼa]], held most of the executive power over their island.
- **[[Cacadiži|Ecăcikĭ]]** — The ministers, who were quite undemocratically chosen by the governors as their subordinates and appointed all manner of particular roles.
- **[[Fayādayāmi|Eyatăsēnĭ]]** — The judiciary, a separate group who elected their own members, and who had the unique power to interpret and apply the laws which held all people of their respective island to account, even the governor.

The governors and ministers were exclusively populated by an aristocratic class of society called [[Nīholu]] who were also the only people with the right to participate in gubernatorial elections. Competing noble families constantly lobbied governors and ministers, who in turn executed their political policy via the instrument of the nobility. In [[Azodo]], the family politics underpinning the local government became more and more complex, resulting in an elaborate bureaucracy, with many new offices regularly created, moved around and abandoned.
## General assembly
As international contact increase, [[Udovuʼo]] faced issues as a unified whole for the first time, which the five governors would meet to discuss. Certain important ministers often joined these discussions, and as these meetings grew and became more regular, a fourth part of the government was formed:
- **[[Ōkēhekwă]]** — The general assembly, a group of 25 former ministers, elected by the ministers themselves, and chaired by the five governors, with the power to legislate on [[Udovuʼo]] as a whole.

The general assembly, contrasted with the special assemblies of many ministers and respective governors on each island, sat in [[Azodo]], and was mostly composed of influential politicians with connections to families on the island. It was the general assembly that codified the other three parts into what became the Azodo Government, turning [[Azodo]] from an island that happened to be culturally influential at the time to the seat of the highest power in [[Udovuʼo]], and turning [[Udovuʼo]] from five friendly *almost* states into a (highly devolved) unitary state. It was a legislative body which worked closely with the judiciary, who were also unified and elevated into a single branch of government, though it remained a strictly distinct group with distinct concerns and abilities, which now included laws on the level of the new state. The legislation of such universal laws had to be approved by the judiciary, giving a bit of balance to the separate powers of the two groups, though the general assembly held both executive and legislative power.
# History
The government is said to have first assembled under a double full moon conjunction on a winter solstice, which can be precisely dated to a day in either 700 or 701 AGS depending on exactly how and when the event was measured, though it may have actually been a bit later. It was essentially created in response to the [[Exodus period|plague and famine of 655-664]], a historical context which came to define the role of the government in supporting the population of [[Udovuʼo]] and preventing similar catastrophes.
## First acts
The first concerns of the government can be summarised by two points:
- **Continued preservation of cultural knowledge**, long considered the primary pillar of society on the islands and left in uncertain waters after the [[Āeruweʼa]] lost her widespread influence.
- **Strict control of trade and commerce**, particularly international maritime trade which was believed to have been the source of the plague.
### Continued preservation of cultural knowledge
To address the first point, new education centres were established on all [[Udovuʼo|five islands]]. These elite universities were dedicated to the perpetuation of knowledge into the future, but not its proliferation throughout the general populace, as only members of the nobility were initially allowed to enter and study. This was in contrast with the older culture of unofficial education by local communities, in which certain mothers who attain the sage-like role of [[Eruweʼa]] would teach their wisdom freely, and could opt for a monastic life in a [[garden palace]]. It was argued by [[Azodo]] scholars of the late [[8th century]] that this practise had actually led to the gradual corruption of the culture it aimed to preserve, evidenced by teachings originating from each of the five [[garden palace|garden palaces]] which, upon comparison, showed more variability and inconsistency than was commonly believed.

In fact, it became a de-facto requirement for young people of noble families to acquire a state education, and as the centuries passed it became more common for wealthy institutions to grant scholarships, which was essentially the only way to ennoble a commoner. To this end, the new academic establishment served a much more valuable purpose to [[Azodo]], creating and securing a well-defined noble class loyal to the state.
### Strict control of trade and commerce
The second point, the control of trade, was emphasised by the political thinkers of the [[7th century|7th]] and [[8th century|8th]] centuries who recognised the importance of resource management and distribution in the pursuit of prosperity, the complete failure of which had evidently resulted in the [[Exodus period#The Great Hunger (656 - 664 AGS)|famine of 656-664]]. With the emergence of the [[Azodo]] state came the first economists, who developed ideas about the nature of resources and wealth and their relationship with labour. The economy of the [[Lavondu]] pseudo-state, a semi-rigorous kind-of-gift-economy operating via the [[Zúnton]] system, was born out of the same schools of thought.

The presiding economic opinion was one of collective resource ownership and strong opposition to personal wealth. This might seem hypocritical, and it was, since the very individuals who developed this anti-capitalist philosophy were themselves from wealthy families, the families who had the political power to ultimately turn that philosophy into policy. The paradox was apparently resolved by the actual implementation: the material wealth of a community was considered to be owned by everyone, and it is the common person who may freely produce it and benefit from it, while it is the burden of the noble families, through management of trade and labour and higher level politics, to ensure that the labour and produce is properly maintained and distributed throughout the community. It's not hard to imagine how fair this actually was for the common people, but they were at least far from being actually oppressed. The stratification of society had always existed to some degree and so was just considered a fact of the universe, only exacerbated by the new rigid noble culture, well-established by the [[9th century]]. It made just as much sense to talk about inequality between a noble and a commoner as it did between a fish and an eagle.

Opposition to personal wealth really meant exactly that, *personal* wealth, so particularly targeted merchants, who were seen to contribute the least to their particular community of origin and society as a whole. In fact, the famine had demonstrated how reliant [[Udovuʼo]] was on maritime trade, yet the actual mechanism of trade was composed entirely of self-interested individuals concerned only with their own profits. The [[Azodo]] solution was to impose strict constraints on trade, and actually to mandate that certain merchants must provide certain amounts of certain goods in certain places.