---
aliases: []
---
**Tuvöblin** was a vast project to restructure society in [[T'ugü]] developed by [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă]] and enacted by a network of [[Lavondu]] scholars and statesmen from around 850 to 861 AGS.
# Introduction
Almost two centuries after the [[Exodus period#The Great Hunger (656 - 664 AGS)|Great Hunger]], the population of [[Udovuʼo]] had returned to its original level of around 100,000, and maritime trade with [[T'ugü]] had begun to resume. The [[Rhavo todo]] flourished and matured into [[Lavdo]], the home of the [[Möxali]]-speaking [[Lavondu]], now representing a not-insignificant proportion, around 6%, of [[T'ugü|T'ugü's]] population of one million. This was recognised by the [[Āʼiyoru|five governors of Udovuʼo]] of the time as a meaningful and ungoverned portion of [[Xiyeru]] culture. To rectify this unregulated cultural colony, [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă]] was elected by the [[Azodo Government]] to be the [[Āʼiyoru|governor]] of [[Lavdo]] in 844 AGS, 154 years after this action was first proposed.

[[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă]] was an accomplished [[Ahōtoli]]-speaking accountant and politician from the [[Erido|central island]]. After spending time with both [[Öb]] and [[Lavondu]] communities in [[T'ugü]], she reasoned that [[Udovuʼo]]-style state politics could not be used to govern the heavily decentralised population without severe disruption to their ways of life. To address this, she developed a scalable, communistic system of resource management and distribution known as [[Zúnton]], the foundation of [[Tuvöblin]].
# Etymology
*Tuvöblin* is a [[Möxali]] term formed from the adjective *tú(v)-* "entire, complete", and a nominalised inchoative form of the verb root *öb-* "to lay out, arrange", giving the combined meaning "complete restructuring" (strictly it should be something like "enstructuring"). It's also something of a play on words, incorporating both *tu-*, the same prefix exhibited in the name *[[T'ugü]]* "entire world" ([[Möxali]] *túgi*), thus referring to the entire population of [[T'ugü]], and the homonymous *[[Öb]]*, who comprise most of that population.

The term *tuvöblin* was not used contemporaneously. It first appeared in historical almanacs composed in the late [[10th century]], when its profound effects had become evident.
# History
*Tuvöblin* brought politics to [[T'ugü]], for better or for worse. Every [[Öb]] became a de-facto citizen of a sort of "soft state", in which each could directly participate in the vast, variably-decentralised government established by [[Zúnton]], allowing new kinds of cultural communication and great civil engineering works. The trade boom that the [[Xiyeru]] elite had so sorely desired for over a century was finally achieved. The volume of maritime import and export exceeded many times the historic level, and so the economy of [[Udovuʼo]] was reconnected not just to [[T'ugü]], but to mainland [[Fountainhead]] in general. Goods from as far as [[Kóty]] would sometimes make their way to the [[Udovuʼo|home islands]], with paper, writing and other important elements of culture given in return. This was a paradigm shift unlike any other in the history of [[Fountainhead]] thus far, enabling the spread of resources and culture between regions which had been essentially entirely disconnected for all of recorded history.

After around 15 years of work, Tuvöblin was semi-arbitrarily said to have completed in 861 AGS, marked by the composition the [[Inbúja Nahan]], a peaceful declaration of the independence of the [[Lavondu]] nation.