Zúnton was an indefinitely scalable communistic political structure designed by [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă]] as part of her [[Tuvöblin]] project, enacted throughout the 850s AGS. The system of Zúnton was a resounding success, resulting in the most important transitional period in [[T'ugü|T'ugü's]] history, which later [[Lavondu]] historians would call *[[Tuvöblin]]*.
# Etymology
The term *zúnton*, which was coined by [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya]] herself c. 850 AGS, is a nominalised iterative form of the verb root *zúg-*, meaning to split into two or more parts, yielding the meaning of "branching" (lit. "repeated splitting").
# Overview
Zúnton is a community-oriented political structure designed to facilitate communication and the management and distribution of resources on any scale of society. The system was used for many centuries in [[T'ugü]], acquiring various modifications throughout history, and became foundational in the political systems of many other societies in the world for well over a millennium after it was first instituted.

Under [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya's]] original formulation of the system, each family would internally appoint themselves a political representative, responsible for paying taxes and maintaining relationships with neighbouring families and such, with some larger families perhaps requiring two or three representatives. Some number of representatives from neighbouring families would form a council who would regularly meet to relay issues and move resources around as they deemed necessary.

It was [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya's]] intention to create a support network between families which could easily exchange people and resources, so that none should incur any preventable misfortune, and perhaps create a stateless society which was greater than the sum of its parts. The council itself would also have a single representative, something like a chair, who would aggregate the concerns of their subordinate council and report to some higher level council. [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya]] reasoned that this fractal structure could extend to any scale required, perhaps even allowing the organisation of resources throughout the whole of [[T'ugü]].
# Five principles
Zúnton is based on five principles, as defined by [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya]]:
1. One who has attained adulthood and is therefore responsible for the children of their family, that is one who has progressed past the first quarter of life, shall be called *[[naqanka]]* (speaker).
2. One who is able to fully appreciate the needs and concerns of strictly less than 50 [[naqanka]], that is adults who share a familial or political affiliation, shall be called *[[flañunka]]* (listener).
3. One who is appointed the role of [[flañunka]], that is one whose duty is to fully appreciate the needs and concerns of their [[naqanka]], shall be called *[yobunka]* (holder of an office).
4. A group of strictly less than 50 [[naqanka]] and one [[flañunka]], that is the [[yobunka]] appointed by the [[naqanka]] themselves, shall be called *[[siba]]* (gathering).
5. The meeting of a [[siba]], that is the gathering of [[naqanka]] and [[flañunka]] on the day of [[víqin]] (lunar conjunction occurring every 12 days), shall be called *[[cömön]]* (exchange).

According to these principles, families would assign themselves a [[yobunka]], or multiple if necessary, who would act as [[flañunka]] and hold a meeting every 12 days, which people would attend if they wished. This is the foundation of Zúnton, which itself was fittingly defined by [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya's]] sixth and final principle:
> 6. The belonging of a [[yobunka]] to a greater [[siba]], that is one in which they, along with the [[yobunka]] of strictly less than 50 politically connected [[siba]], assume the role of [[naqanka]], shall be called *zúnton* (branching).

This principle is the core mechanism behind Zúnton, that any listener of any council can assume the role of speaker in a higher-level council to discuss matters on a larger scale. One slight oversight of the system is that such a meeting would require the lower-level council's [[flañunka]] to attend a different meeting to the one they were supposed to be chairing sometimes. Different councils would develop different strategies to account for this, some appointing a temporary [[flañunka]] in the meantime and some just having no such role for some meetings and letting matters carry over to the next.
# Impact
As an initial test of Zúnton, elite grammarians affiliated with [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya]] gathered information on regional variation in written and spoken language throughout [[T'ugü]] and constructed a new, generalised script known as *[[Opsíbdañox]]*. The entire process of research and development took place in the late 850s AGS, with the script beginning to see real use in 860 AGS for the composition of the [[Inbúja Nahan]]. Around the same time, the *[[Öcídñox]]* 1540-day calendar was developed by similarly combining regional variants into one broadly applicable calendar.

The Zúnton system remained in practice in [[T'ugü]] almost unchanged for several centuries after [[Koxĭya Ahoukēholuʼŭihă|Koxĭya's]] death and became foundational to the political systems of many societies throughout history, appearing in various modified forms for over a millennium.