“On the first day of existence, did [[Ofuxmŕ|the Sun]] emerge from the endless oceans, and she looked around and thought, this is good, this is beautiful…”

“…And then the Sun said, ‘Oh [[Ōqomŕ|Sky]], you are beautiful’, and reached out as if to cradle its face. And lo, the Sky opened its eyes and said ‘O Sun, you are beautiful’…”

“…The Sky reached into the water, and waves careened away from its arms, and as it pulled its hands out of the ocean a sapling was cupped inside.  
The sun wept, for it looked like it would not survive, and so she knelt to give it a kiss. And lo, the tree of life sprouted into the heavens…”

“…When the Sky blew through the tree of life, its leaves floated through the air, and the Sky thought this was beautiful. So the Sky blew through the tree once more, and a fruit fell from its branches. The Sun tasted the fruit, and thought it was delicious. And so, the Sky blew through the tree of life a third time, and with a loud snap a branch fell from the tree. From this branch sprang {thunder-deity}…”

“…The Sun looked on at the tree of life, and thanked it for its existence. She climbed to the top of the tree and gazed upon all that was and said ‘O Boundless Ocean, you are beautiful. Would that there were more who could gaze upon you.’ And lo, the Sun took the fruit of the tree of life, and from the flesh she made {?-deity}, and from the seed she made {?-deity}. She plucked a handful of leaves which she stored in a pouch, and began to climb down.  
On the way down she grabbed a small branch that fell from her climb, and with it she made {?-deity}. On the way down she grabbed a small bit of bark that had peeled from her climb, and with it she made {?-deity}. And on the way down, the Sky gave her a flower from one of the branches, and together they made {?-deity}. Once the Sun had reached the base of the tree, she, the Sky, and all five of their children thanked it for its existence.  
At the base of the tree of life, the Sun grabbed five leaves from her satchel, and said to the Ocean ‘With these, I give my gift to you.’ The Sun dipped the five leaves into the Ocean, and with these five dew-kissed leaves did she make people…”

“…And so, the five siblings set out on the Sun's command, to see the beauty around them, and share it. The fifth sibling found a flower, and all agreed it was beautiful, and so they thanked it for its existence and offered it to the Sun, and she was happy. The fourth sibling found a gem, which all agreed was beautiful, so they thanked it for existing and offered it to the Sun, and she was happy. The third sibling found a fish, which they all agreed would be delicious, and so they thanked it for existing and shared it with the Sun, and she was happy. The second sibling found a {land_animal}, and all agreed it would be delicious, so they thanked it for existing, and shared it with the Sun, and she was happy. The first sibling found a log and some stones, and no one thought they were beautiful, but the first sibling saw how beautiful they could be, and lo did they craft an axe. The siblings were in awe, and agreed that it was beautiful. And so they thanked the logs and stones for existing, they thanked the first sibling for toiling, and they shared it with the Sun, and she was ecstatic. The Sun was so pleased, that she imbued it with her own power and named it {sacred-axe}…”

“…On their journey, the siblings encountered a figure who said ‘I am [[Qimonsugyŕ]], I have not come to harm you. Your mother made you as gifts for me, and I have come to thank you for myself. I have enjoyed watching your adventure, and wished to speak to you before its end. I am Qimonsugyŕ, I am the Inevitable, Your mother had planned to make you gods, but I have seen that this will not come to pass. I have seen that you will rest in my embrace, under the waves. Do not fear it, I will welcome you with open arms.’ And on this news were the siblings filled with fear, and they began to sprint back to the tree of life.  
Upon arriving at its base, did the Sun ask them what was wrong, and the first sibling wailed ‘O Mother, we do not wish to leave your side anymore! We wish to no longer adventure!’  
When the Sun asked why did the second sibling cry out ‘O Mother, we could not bear to lose your light!’  
The third sibling decreed ‘I wish to be away from the oceans forever so that I might travel in your light eternally!’  
Then, the fourth sibling cried out ‘O Mother, make us gods! Make us gods now, so we can be with you forever!’  
And to this the Sun did reply that they were not ready to be gods, that there was still so much for them to see and learn.  
Upon hearing this, did the fifth sibling declare ‘Then we will have to make ourselves gods, by climbing to the top of the tree of life!’  
The Sun was distraught at her children’s decrees, and could do naught but weep. The Sky tried to blow the siblings off, but they held on too tight, and when it went to try again, they were too high up, and it did not want to harm the siblings.  
Upon hearing this commotion, and borne upon the waves caused by the Sky, Qimonsugyŕ did rise to see what was happening, and said ‘Oh dearest Sun, should they reach the top, they will be lost to you forever.’  
‘Oh Boundless Ocean, I could not bear for them to lose my light while in your embrace.’  
Upon hearing this, did Qimonsugyŕ gather pieces of the tree of life that floated in his waters, and fashioned them into two children of his own. ‘Dearest Sun, you are welcome to come visit my embrace. They need not be deprived of your light. And when you are there, in your stead can my children fly across the sky.’  
With her fears assuaged did the Sun rise from her weeping, and with {sacred-axe} aloft did she cut down the tree of life, splitting the realms. As the great tree came crashing down, did it scatter the five siblings, and when it fell did it make the mortal realm.  
And from the stump of the tree of life did the Sun make two more children, one born holding a Yu flower, and another born holding a seed of the tree of life, and to these two children did she say ‘Your siblings need guidance, be there for them.’ And the Sky whisked the two children away, to a lowlands cradled by mountains, that many rivers flow through, and there did the seventh sibling plant the seed, and there did the people prosper…”