The First Sun Chiefdom was the first attested coalition of all [[The Haankaysiw People|Haankaysiw]] [[Mefmoʻï]]. It was known to the Haankaysiw as **Hum Mefmoʻïʻoʻï**.

# Before The Chiefdom
Born at 0AGS as sole heir to the position of [[Teyokkay]] over the prosperous and powerful Koʻwan mefmoʻï, [[Teyokkaykoʻwan Seʻisektiküt Towkatahey|Towkatahey]] was raised to lead her people into greatness. At a young age, she was ambitious and reckless. At age 13 she almost lost her life in a raid, receiving a permanent scar over her back that she carried until death. At age 18, the age where she got to choose her own name, she began planning to unite all the disparate Haankaysiw mefmoʻï and lead all the Haankaysiw people into an age of prosperity. By age 20, she had managed to forge alliances with all the mefmoʻïï who's Teyokkayay spoke the same major dialect as her. On her 25th birthday, she appointed herself Hum Teyokkayʻoʻï with the agreement of all her allies. At age 30 she had managed to unite all of the Haankaysiw mefmoʻïï, either by diplomatic actions or by force.

# Towkatahey's Rule
Her 20 years of ruling over all the Haankaysiw were not smooth sailing, despite her writing reform and her subsequent ushering of an era of writing by sending teachers to every clan her rule was not popular and often seen negatively by the common folk, who were tired of and worried about the Teyokkayʻoʻï's tithes of parts of their flocks. They were right to be worried. During her rule, the Haankaysiw experienced the [[Raamti|worst winters]] they had felt in generations, leading to the death of many of the animals they herded and the decimation of the Haankaysiw population. Near the end of her rule, her home camp that she had set up as the heart of the Sun Chiefdom was subject to near constant raids of revolt, and at age 50 one of these revolts managed to land a fatal blow. Her shamans, closest advisers, and partners swear that as she died the clouds covered the sun, and as they parted the sun shone brighter than it ever did. She died, facing the sun, after repelling the raiders that took her life.

# After Towkatahey's Death
Her heir, with none of her diplomatic skills, charisma, or bonds, quickly lost the backing of the remaining Teyokkayay who served their mother. They decided to adopt an isolationist mindset, focusing on revitalising the core Koʻwan territories. Unfortunately, the rule of their mother had left many enemies in its wake, and the remnants ruled by her heir were subject to repeated grudge raids, and the territories substantially shrank by 100AGS, and before 200AGS, [[Hüm Kiinfe Haankaysiw]] Koʻwan (The Cradles dialect) was no longer a major dialect.

The tyrannical self-centred reign of Koʻwan Seʻisektiküt Towkatahey Teyokkayʻoʻï shook up the political landscape of the Haankaysiw after her death. Near the end of her reign, a radical writer released a manuscript detailing what a Haankaysiw mefmoʻï ruled by an elected council of elders would look like and how it would benefit the people more than the hereditary chiefdoms that had previously dominated unchallenged. Their book spread like wildfire, and after the death of Towkatahey many Haankaysiw deposed their Teyokkay and installed an elected council of elders in their place, with some Teyokkayay even willingly seceding. It is important to note, however, that amongst the Haankaysiw who speak the Bay and River dialects, Teyokkay remained dominant. Amongst the Haankaysiw mefmoʻï that speak the River dialect, overthrowings were attempted but often thwarted, and amongst the Haankaysiw mefmoʻï that speak the Bay dialect, often no overthrowing was attempted at all.