Oksandanderi is a region within northern [[Fountainhead]]. Oksandanderi borders in the north to a great mountain range separating it from the lands of Irimri. In the southeast it is bordered by a large and hostile desert, inhabited only by a few nomadic people, while ultimately in the west another smaller mountain range separates it from the land of [[Uhustaw]] and [[Qnōp']] as a whole. Oksandanderi is home to several cultures, which have their own language and established states throughout a long and rich history.  

## Name
The land of Oksandanderi went under different names by different culture and through its history. The name *Oksandanderi* is merely the one, which became the most popular. It stems from the [[Kathurn language]] and translates to "land of apple tree orchards". Alternative names are *Pikhanda-Erkhanda* "Lowlands and Highlands", *Ván-tis* "Mountains and Rivers" and *Ethan* "Great Garden". In the [[Ardanic language]] the land is commonly referred to as [[Alpa Yumta]]. The [[Walkenian people]] traditionally used the name *Ban Toh* "Great Land" for it, although this name can also be interpreted to mean the entire world. 
The names of Oks. are largely derived from the popular viewpoint of its people as a garden. Situated between two hostile poles, great mountains and arid deserts, it is seen as a pristine refuge, which needs to be cultivated and kept safe to prosper. It is a pristine oasis between barren lands. 
## Geography 
The geography of Oksandanderi can be grouped into several larger regions. The main distinction is between the Highlands and the Lowlands. The Lowlands harbor the majority of the population and are fed by several large rivers, such as the [[Yarla]] and the [[Fsikay]]. The rivers are used to enable a large and sophisticated network of irrigation canals. This system makes it possible, that hundreds of thousands of people can live in the Lowlands. The Lowlands themselves are often differentiated into the [[Yarlish Lowlands]] and other areas, such as the [[Ardanic Basin]]. The Lowlands are bordered by steppes in the Southeast, which give way to hostile deserts. The other part of Oksandanderi consists mostly of Highlands. The Highlands themselves are subdivided into the [[Western Highlands]], the [[Central Highlands]] and the [[Eastern Highlands]]. The areas between the Highlands and the Lowlands mostly consist of steppes. One subregion, which does not belong to either the Highlands nor the Lowlands proper is the [[Walkenian Steppe]].
## Cultures 
Oksandanderi is home to several unique ethnic groups and cultures. The most plentiful among them are probably the [[Yarlish people]], named after the great Yarla river. The Yarlish people speak [[Yarlish languages]] and can be internally differentiated into [[Yarlish Lowlanders]] and Highlanders, also called [[Ván-Enne]]. There are additionally several subgroups like the [[Makhat]], who began to form a culture of their own, arising from mixed backgrounds. 
The second largest group are the [[Ardanic people]], who mainly inhabit the southwest of Oks. They are known for their long lasting republican state called the [[Tyon-Arat]]. Apart from them there are several more cultures like the nomadic [[Walkenian people]] and the [[Korrenian peoples]] of the eastern Highlands. 
## History
Main article: [[History of Oksandanderi]]
The history of Oksandanderi reaches far back for many centuries, if not millennia. It can be subdivided into several macrohistorical periods. 
Everything before the [[1st millennium BGS]] can be considered ancient and prehistorical. During [[7th century BGS]] writing is invented in Oks. and a period known as [[Formative-Literary period]] begins. 

In the year [[2nd century|164 AGS]] [[Astmerge the Great]] establishes the first empire of Oks., known as the [[Astmergian Empire]]. This empire however is fairly shortlived and falls into disarray almost immediately after his death, with different provincial governments claiming legitimacy. 

After another period called Astmergian Dominion, the period known as [[Time of Fragmentation]] follows, which is generally marked by chaos and warfare between several squabbling petty states. Though during this period several important developments took place. For one the states of Tyon-Arat and the [[Makhatganda]] formed, as well as the religious movement of [[Kamalism]] becoming prominent. 

The Time of Fragmentation comes eventually to an end in the early [[6th century]] through the invasion of the Walken people and the founding of the [[Walken Empire]]. The ensuing period is called the [[Four Kingdoms period]]. This period is marked by long enduring cold war between four powerful states, the Walken Empire, [[Yarlaganda Empire]], the Tyon-Arat and the Makhatganda. 

The end of the Four Kingdoms is fairly less spectacular than its inception. Mostly the Walken Empire descended into civil war, while the Yarlaganda, in absence of a common enemy slowly dissolved. The so called [[Imperial period]] would not begin until the late [[9th century]] and there is no concrete term for that interim period. 

The [[9th century]] saw the opening of Oks. to the rest of the world and the sending of many expeditions and embassies into foreign lands. Among them the [[Embassy of Peace and Friendship]] to [[Irimri]] or the expedition by [[Asin Erta]] to the [[Uhustaw]].

In central Oks. the [[Empire of Kalotgane]] would begin its rise during the [[10th century]] and [[11th century]] and conquer most of it. This would culminate into a period known as the [[Long Peace]], by some regarded as the cultural pinnacle of the Yarlish people. The power of [[Kalotgane]] would last until the [[16th century]], when it would burn within the flames of its own making. 
## Religion 
Religion in Oksandanderi is rarely monolithic. The religious believes of all people of Oksandanderi share some commonalities, but also many differences. From folk religion to state religion and monastic orders and philosophical movements, there are a lot of different branches of religious thought and practice. In essence, the people of Oksandanderi share a common worldview and ideas on what constitutes a good life. 

Said common core is simply called [[Traditional Oksandanderian faith]]. In terms of cosmology it features the following notions. The world itself is thought of as horizontal in nature and thoughts about transcendence rarely come up. While there are believes in an otherworld sometimes, there are no believes in an underworld or heavenly realm or anything close to a world not within our world. Even the otherworld is part of this world, it is just one which does not comply to the laws of the human mind and the human realm as such. Human control is only tentative, but essential to this, as the world beyond the garden is inevitably hostile. There are no supreme deities and powerful gods, but mostly spirits of nature, which inhabit places outside of human control. Humans need to act accordingly to their laws, as they need to act according to their own laws regarded as [[Kas]]. Although some forms of belief know a myriad of different spirits, which reside in our world, deities are rarely personified and more often appear as abstract concept worthy of praise and thanks.

In regards to society, humans ought to inspire good deeds and good thoughts. A deep commonality is the emphasis on thankfulness and reciprocity, both towards nature and towards humans. During the [[4th century]] and [[5th century]] several religious movement sprung up in Oks. and proliferated greatly. Among them are [[Kamalism]], [[Sumalism]], [[Túnyërgelde]] and others. Most is attributed to a religious figure or prophet known as [[Kamalyeray]], although many parts of his life have turned to legend. From that original Kamalism several other sects branched off eventually. 

A particular religious notion among the Ardanian people is also the [[Wayač]], a religious tradition, which is also dubbed the "second faith" or the "hidden faith", for its pseudo-secretive nature. 